17-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase deficiency accounts for about 1 percent of congenital adrenal hyperplasia cases. It is estimated to occur in 1 in 1 million people worldwide.
17-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase deficiency is caused by mutations in the CYP17A1 gene. The protein produced from this gene is involved in the formation of steroid hormones. This group of hormones includes sex hormones such as testosterone and estrogen, which are needed for normal sexual development and reproduction; mineralocorticoids, which help regulate the body's salt and water balance; and glucocorticoids, which are involved in maintaining blood sugar levels and regulating the body's response to stress.  Steroid hormones are produced through a series of chemical reactions. The CYP17A1 enzyme performs two important reactions in this process. The enzyme has 17 alpha()-hydroxylase activity, which is important for production of glucocorticoids and sex hormones. CYP17A1 also has 17,20-lyase activity, which is integral to the production of sex hormones.  17-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase deficiency results from a shortage (deficiency) of both enzyme activities. The amount of remaining enzyme activity determines whether a person will have the complete or partial form of the disorder. Individuals with the complete form have CYP17A1 gene mutations that result in the production of an enzyme with very little or no 17-hydroxylase and 17,20-lyase activity. People with the partial form of this condition have CYP17A1 gene mutations that allow some enzyme activity, although at reduced levels.  With little or no 17-hydroxylase activity, production of glucocorticoids is impaired, and instead, mineralocorticoids are produced. An excess of these salt-regulating hormones leads to hypertension and hypokalemia.  Loss of 17,20-lyase activity impairs sex hormone production. Shortage of these hormones disrupts development of the reproductive system and impairs the onset of puberty in males and females with 17-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase deficiency.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of 17 alpha-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase deficiency:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Deficiency of steroid 17-alpha-monooxygenase   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care