1q21.1 microdeletion syndrome is a newly described chromosome abnormality where a segment of genetic material on the long arm (or q arm) of chromosome 1 at position 21.1 is missing (or deleted). It has been described in 46 patients to date. Some people with this deletion have no observable features; while others have variable features that can include small head, developmental delay (speech and motor delays), mild intellectual disability, distinctive facial features, and eye abnormalities. Other findings can include seizures as well as abnormalities of the heart, skeleton, and urinary system. Psychiatric and behavioral features can include autism spectrum disorders, schizophrenia, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and sleep disorders. This syndrome is caused by a deletion in a specific region of 1q21.1, which is distinct from the deletion region that causes TAR syndrome.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for 1q21.1 microdeletion syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal nasal morphology 50% Abnormality of the palate 50% Cognitive impairment 50% Deeply set eye 50% Epicanthus 50% Frontal bossing 50% Long philtrum 50% Microcephaly 50% Short stature 50% Abnormality of the aorta 7.5% Abnormality of the cardiac septa 7.5% Abnormality of thumb phalanx 7.5% Aplasia/Hypoplasia affecting the eye 7.5% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the corpus callosum 7.5% Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 7.5% Autism 7.5% Brachydactyly syndrome 7.5% Cataract 7.5% Chorioretinal coloboma 7.5% Clinodactyly of the 5th finger 7.5% Cryptorchidism 7.5% Hand polydactyly 7.5% Hernia of the abdominal wall 7.5% Hydrocephalus 7.5% Hypermetropia 7.5% Intrauterine growth retardation 7.5% Iris coloboma 7.5% Joint hypermobility 7.5% Muscular hypotonia 7.5% Patent ductus arteriosus 7.5% Preaxial foot polydactyly 7.5% Scoliosis 7.5% Seizures 7.5% Sensorineural hearing impairment 7.5% Short foot 7.5% Sleep disturbance 7.5% Strabismus 7.5% Talipes 7.5% Toe syndactyly 7.5% Vesicoureteral reflux 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Broad hallux - Broad thumb - Bulbous nose - Coarctation of aorta - Incomplete penetrance - Intellectual disability - Schizophrenia - Transposition of the great arteries - Truncus arteriosus - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
1q21.1 microdeletion is a chromosomal change in which a small piece of chromosome 1 is deleted in each cell. The deletion occurs on the long (q) arm of the chromosome in a region designated q21.1. This chromosomal change increases the risk of delayed development, intellectual disability, physical abnormalities, and neurological and psychiatric problems. However, some people with a 1q21.1 microdeletion do not appear to have any associated features.  About 75 percent of all children with a 1q21.1 microdeletion have delayed development, particularly affecting the development of motor skills such as sitting, standing, and walking. The intellectual disability and learning problems associated with this genetic change are usually mild.  Distinctive facial features can also be associated with 1q21.1 microdeletions. The changes are usually subtle and can include a prominent forehead; a large, rounded nasal tip; a long space between the nose and upper lip (philtrum); and a high, arched roof of the mouth (palate). Other common signs and symptoms of 1q21.1 microdeletions include an unusually small head (microcephaly), short stature, and eye problems such as clouding of the lenses (cataracts). Less frequently, 1q21.1 microdeletions are associated with heart defects, abnormalities of the genitalia or urinary system, bone abnormalities (particularly in the hands and feet), and hearing loss.  Neurological problems that have been reported in people with a 1q21.1 microdeletion include seizures and weak muscle tone (hypotonia). Psychiatric or behavioral problems affect a small percentage of people with this genetic change. These include developmental conditions called autism spectrum disorders that affect communication and social interaction, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and sleep disturbances. Studies suggest that deletions of genetic material from the 1q21.1 region may also be risk factors for schizophrenia.  Some people with a 1q21.1 microdeletion do not have any of the intellectual, physical, or psychiatric features described above. In these individuals, the microdeletion is often detected when they undergo genetic testing because they have a relative with the chromosomal change. It is unknown why 1q21.1 microdeletions cause cognitive and physical changes in some individuals but few or no health problems in others, even within the same family.
1q21.1 microdeletion is a rare chromosomal change; only a few dozen individuals with this deletion have been reported in the medical literature.
Most people with a 1q21.1 microdeletion are missing a sequence of about 1.35 million DNA building blocks (base pairs), also written as 1.35 megabases (Mb), in the q21.1 region of chromosome 1. However, the exact size of the deleted region varies. This deletion affects one of the two copies of chromosome 1 in each cell.  The signs and symptoms that can result from a 1q21.1 microdeletion are probably related to the loss of several genes in this region. Researchers are working to determine which missing genes contribute to the specific features associated with the deletion. Because some people with a 1q21.1 microdeletion have no obvious related features, additional genetic or environmental factors are thought to be involved in the development of signs and symptoms.  Researchers sometimes refer to 1q21.1 microdeletion as the recurrent distal 1.35-Mb deletion to distinguish it from the genetic change that causes thrombocytopenia-absent radius syndrome (TAR syndrome). TAR syndrome results from the deletion of a different, smaller DNA segment in the chromosome 1q21.1 region near the area where the 1.35-Mb deletion occurs. The chromosomal change related to TAR syndrome is often called the 200-kb deletion.
1q21.1 microdeletion is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means that missing genetic material from one of the two copies of chromosome 1 in each cell is sufficient to increase the risk of delayed development, intellectual disability, and other signs and symptoms.  In at least half of cases, individuals with a 1q21.1 microdeletion inherit the chromosomal change from a parent. In general, parents who carry a 1q21.1 microdeletion have milder signs and symptoms than their children who inherit the deletion, even though the deletion is the same size. About one-quarter of these parents have no associated features.  A 1q21.1 microdeletion can also occur in people whose parents do not carry the chromosomal change. In this situation, the deletion occurs most often as a random event during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) in a parent or in early embryonic development.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of 1q21.1 microdeletion:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: 1q21.1 Recurrent Microdeletion  - Genetic Testing Registry: 1q21.1 recurrent microdeletion   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care