21-hydroxylase-deficiency is a genetic disorder of cortisol biosynthesis. It is caused by mutations in the human 21-hydroxylase gene (CYP21A2). Symptoms of 21-hydroxylase deficiency vary, but can involve salt-wasting crises in infants; ambiguous genitalia in female infants; excessive hair, deep voice, abnormal periods, no periods, and fertility problems in older girls and women; early development of masculine features in boys; and shorter than average adult height, acne, and blood pressure problems.
What causes salt-wasting, simple virilizing, and nonclassical 21-hydroxylase-deficient congenital adrenal hyperplasia? Salt-wasting, simple virilizing, and late-onset 21-hydroxylase deficiency are all caused by mutations in the human 21-hydroxylase gene (CYP21A2).
 21-hydroxylase-deficient congenital adrenal hyperplasia has an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. In autosomal recessive conditions, both parents carry one copy of a mutated gene for the disorder. They have a 25 percent chance with each pregnancy of having a child affected by the disorder. The chance with each pregnancy of having an unaffected child who is a carrier of the disorder is 50 percent, and the chance that a child will not have the disorder and will not be a carrier is 25 percent. See the illustration below.
 Yes. Genetic testing of 21-hydroxylase-deficient congenital adrenal hyperplasia is available. In most people with this condition, the genetic test result can be used to predict disease severity. Click here to view a list of laboratories offering CYP21A2 testing.
 The objectives for treating 21-hydroxylase deficiency differ with age. In childhood, the overall goal is to replace cortisol. Obtaining hormonal balance is important and patients growth velocity and bone age is monitored. Routine analysis of blood, urine, and/or saliva may also be necessary. Corrective surgery is frequently required for females born with abnormal genitalia. In late childhood and adolescence, maintaining hormonal balance is equally important. Overtreatment may result in obesity and delayed menarche/puberty, whereas under-replacement will result in sexual precocity. Also, it is important that teens and young adults with 21-hydroxylase deficiency be successfully transitioned to adult care facilities. Follow-up of adult patients should involve multidisciplinary clinics. Problems in adult women include fertility concerns, excessive hair growth, and menstrual irregularity; obesity and impact of short stature; sexual dysfunction and psychological problems. Counseling may be helpful. Adult males may develop enlargement of the testes and if so, should work with an endocrinologist familiar with the management of patients with this deficiency.
The classic forms of 21-hydroxylase deficiency occur in 1 in 15,000 newborns. The prevalence of the non-classic form of 21-hydroxylase deficiency is estimated to be 1 in 1,000 individuals. The prevalence of both classic and non-classic forms varies among different ethnic populations.  21-hydroxylase deficiency is one of a group of disorders known as congenital adrenal hyperplasias that impair hormone production and disrupt sexual development. 21-hydroxylase deficiency is responsible for about 95 percent of all cases of congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
Mutations in the CYP21A2 gene cause 21-hydroxylase deficiency. The CYP21A2 gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called 21-hydroxylase. This enzyme is found in the adrenal glands, where it plays a role in producing hormones called cortisol and aldosterone. Cortisol has numerous functions, such as maintaining blood sugar levels, protecting the body from stress, and suppressing inflammation. Aldosterone is sometimes called the salt-retaining hormone because it regulates the amount of salt retained by the kidneys. The retention of salt affects fluid levels in the body and blood pressure.  21-hydroxylase deficiency is caused by a shortage (deficiency) of the 21-hydroxylase enzyme. When 21-hydroxylase is lacking, substances that are usually used to form cortisol and aldosterone instead build up in the adrenal glands and are converted to androgens. The excess production of androgens leads to abnormalities of sexual development in people with 21-hydroxylase deficiency. A lack of aldosterone production contributes to the salt loss in people with the salt-wasting form of this condition.  The amount of functional 21-hydroxylase enzyme determines the severity of the disorder. Individuals with the salt-wasting type have CYP21A2 mutations that result in a completely nonfunctional enzyme. People with the simple virilizing type of this condition have CYP21A2 gene mutations that allow the production of low levels of functional enzyme. Individuals with the non-classic type of this disorder have CYP21A2 mutations that result in the production of reduced amounts of the enzyme, but more enzyme than either of the other types.