22q13.3 deletion syndrome, also known as Phelan-McDermid syndrome, is a chromosome abnormality caused by the loss (deletion) of a small piece of chromosome 22. The deletion occurs near the end of the long arm (or q arm) at a location designated as q13.3. The signs and symptoms of this condition vary widely from person to person. Common symptoms include low muscle tone (hypotonia), intellectual disability, delayed or absent speech, abnormal growth, tendency to overheat, large hands, and abnormal toenails. Affected individuals may have characteristic behaviors, such as mouthing or chewing on non-food items, decreased perception of pain, and autistic-like behaviors. The loss of a particular gene on chromosome 22, called the SHANK3 gene, is likely responsible for many of the signs and symptoms of 22q13.3 deletion syndrome. Additional genes within the deleted region probably contribute to the variable features of the syndrome.
At least 500 cases of 22q13.3 deletion syndrome are known.
22q13.3 deletion syndrome is caused by a deletion near the end of the long (q) arm of chromosome 22. The signs and symptoms of 22q13.3 deletion syndrome are probably related to the loss of multiple genes in this region. The size of the deletion varies among affected individuals.  A ring chromosome 22 can also cause 22q13.3 deletion syndrome. A ring chromosome is a circular structure that occurs when a chromosome breaks in two places, the tips of the chromosome are lost, and the broken ends fuse together. People with ring chromosome 22 have one copy of this abnormal chromosome in some or all of their cells. Researchers believe that several critical genes near the end of the long (q) arm of chromosome 22 are lost when the ring chromosome 22 forms. If one of the chromosome break points is at position 22q13.3, people with ring chromosome 22 have similar signs and symptoms as those with a simple deletion.  Researchers are working to identify all of the genes that contribute to the features of 22q13.3 deletion syndrome. They have determined that the loss of a particular gene on chromosome 22, SHANK3, is likely to be responsible for many of the syndrome's characteristic signs (such as developmental delay, intellectual disability, and impaired speech). Additional genes in the deleted region probably contribute to the varied features of 22q13.3 deletion syndrome.
Most cases of 22q13.3 deletion syndrome are not inherited. The deletion occurs most often as a random event during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) or in early fetal development. Affected people typically have no history of the disorder in their family, though they can pass the chromosome deletion to their children.  When 22q13.3 deletion syndrome is inherited, its inheritance pattern is considered autosomal dominant because a deletion in one copy of chromosome 22 in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. About 15 to 20 percent of people with 22q13.3 deletion syndrome inherit a chromosome abnormality from an unaffected parent. In these cases, the parent carries a chromosomal rearrangement called a balanced translocation, in which a segment from one chromosome has traded places with a segment from another chromosome, but no genetic material is gained or lost. Balanced translocations usually do not cause any health problems; however, they can become unbalanced as they are passed to the next generation. Children who inherit an unbalanced translocation can have a chromosomal rearrangement with extra or missing genetic material. Individuals with 22q13.3 deletion syndrome who inherit an unbalanced translocation are missing genetic material from the long arm of chromosome 22, which results in the health problems characteristic of this disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of 22q13.3 deletion syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Phelan-McDermid Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: 22q13.3 deletion syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Sweating--absent   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care