22q11.2 duplication syndrome is a condition caused by an extra copy of a small piece of chromosome 22 which contains about 30 to 40 genes. The features of this condition vary widely, even among members of the same family (intrafamilial variability). Affected individuals may have intellectual or learning disability, developmental delay, slow growth leading to short stature, and weak muscle tone (hypotonia). Many people with the condition have no apparent physical or intellectual disabilities. It is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, with about 70% genes of affected individuals inheriting the condition from a parent. In other cases it occurs as a de novo mutation (new genetic change) in an individual; however, individuals with a de novo mutation can can pass the duplication to their children. Researchers are working to determine which duplicated genes may contribute to the developmental delay and other problems that sometimes affect people with this condition. Duplication is not detectable by karyotype and most of the people with 22q11.2 duplication syndrome are identified by a special technique known as chromosomal microarray. Treatment depends on the symptoms and includes an individualized educational program. Read more out chromosome 22.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for 22q11.2 duplication syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of chromosome segregation 90% Abnormal nasal morphology 50% Abnormality of the pharynx 50% Abnormality of the voice 50% Cleft palate 50% Cognitive impairment 50% Epicanthus 50% High forehead 50% Hypertelorism 50% Malar flattening 50% Muscular hypotonia 50% Narrow face 50% Neurological speech impairment 50% Abnormality of immune system physiology 7.5% Abnormality of the aorta 7.5% Abnormality of the philtrum 7.5% Abnormality of the upper urinary tract 7.5% Anterior creases of earlobe 7.5% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the thymus 7.5% Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 7.5% Autism 7.5% Displacement of the external urethral meatus 7.5% Hearing impairment 7.5% Hypoplastic left heart 7.5% Microcephaly 7.5% Obsessive-compulsive behavior 7.5% Ptosis 7.5% Scoliosis 7.5% Seizures 7.5% Stereotypic behavior 7.5% Tetralogy of Fallot 7.5% Transposition of the great arteries 7.5% Ventricular septal defect 7.5% Abnormality of cardiovascular system morphology - Abnormality of the pinna - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Delayed speech and language development - Depressed nasal ridge - Growth delay - High palate - Intellectual disability - Low-set ears - Nasal speech - Specific learning disability - Sporadic - Velopharyngeal insufficiency - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
22q11.2 deletion syndrome is a spectrum disorder that includes conditions formerly called DiGeorge syndrome; velocardiofacial syndrome; conotruncal anomaly face syndrome; cases of Opitz G/BBB syndrome; and Cayler cardiofacial syndrome. The features and severity can vary greatly among affected people. Signs and symptoms may include cleft palate, heart defects, recurrent infections, unique facial characteristics, feeding problems, immune system disorders, kidney abnormalities, hypoparathyroidism, thrombocytopenia, scoliosis, hearing loss, developmental delay, and learning disabilities. People with this condition are also more likely to develop certain autoimmune disorders and personality disorders. In most cases, the syndrome occurs for the first time in the affected person; about 10% of cases are inherited from a parent. It is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.
 22q11.2 deletion syndrome is caused by a missing piece (deletion) of part of chromosome 22 in each cell. The deletion occurs near the middle of the chromosome at a location designated q11.2. Most people with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome are missing a piece of the chromosome that contains about 30 to 40 genes, many of which have not been well characterized. Some affected people have smaller deletions. Researchers are working to learn more about all of the genes that contribute to the features of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. The deletion of a particular gene, TBX1, is probably responsible for many of the syndrome's characteristic signs (such as heart defects, a cleft palate, distinctive facial features, hearing loss, and low calcium levels). Loss of this gene may also contribute to behavioral problems. The loss of another gene, COMT, may also cause increased risk of behavioral problems and mental illness in affected people. The other genes that are deleted likely contribute to the various features of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome.
 Most cases of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome are not inherited from a parent and are caused by a random error during the formation of egg or sperm cells, or during early fetal development. In about 10% of cases, the deletion is inherited from a parent with the deletion. All people with the deletion, whether they inherited it or not, can pass the deletion to their children. The inheritance pattern is autosomal dominant because having a deletion in only one copy of chromosome 22 in each cell is enough to cause signs and symptoms. Each child of a person with the deletion has a 50% (1 in 2) chance to inherit the deletion.
22q11.2 duplication is a condition caused by an extra copy of a small piece of chromosome 22. The duplication occurs near the middle of the chromosome at a location designated q11.2.  The features of this condition vary widely, even among members of the same family. Affected individuals may have developmental delay, intellectual disability, slow growth leading to short stature, and weak muscle tone (hypotonia). Many people with the duplication have no apparent physical or intellectual disabilities.
The prevalence of the 22q11.2 duplication in the general population is difficult to determine. Because many individuals with this duplication have no associated symptoms, their duplication may never be detected.  Most people tested for the 22q11.2 duplication have come to medical attention as a result of developmental delay or other problems affecting themselves or a family member. In one study, about 1 in 700 people tested for these reasons had the 22q11.2 duplication. Overall, more than 60 individuals with the duplication have been identified.
People with 22q11.2 duplication have an extra copy of some genetic material at position q11.2 on chromosome 22. In most cases, this extra genetic material consists of a sequence of about 3 million DNA building blocks (base pairs), also written as 3 megabases (Mb).  The 3 Mb duplicated region contains 30 to 40 genes. For many of these genes, little is known about their function. A small percentage of affected individuals have a shorter duplication in the same region. Researchers are working to determine which duplicated genes may contribute to the developmental delay and other problems that sometimes affect people with this condition.
The inheritance of 22q11.2 duplication is considered autosomal dominant because the duplication affects one of the two copies of chromosome 22 in each cell. About 70 percent of affected individuals inherit the duplication from a parent. In other cases, the duplication is not inherited and instead occurs as a random event during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs and sperm) or in early fetal development. These affected people typically have no history of the disorder in their family, although they can pass the duplication to their children.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of 22q11.2 duplication:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: 22q11.2 Duplication  - Genetic Testing Registry: 22q11.2 duplication syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
22q11.2 deletion syndrome affects an estimated 1 in 4,000 people. However, the condition may actually be more common than this estimate because doctors and researchers suspect it is underdiagnosed due to its variable features. The condition may not be identified in people with mild signs and symptoms, or it may be mistaken for other disorders with overlapping features.
Most people with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome are missing a sequence of about 3 million DNA building blocks (base pairs) on one copy of chromosome 22 in each cell. This region contains 30 to 40 genes, many of which have not been well characterized. A small percentage of affected individuals have shorter deletions in the same region. This condition is described as a contiguous gene deletion syndrome because it results from the loss of many genes that are close together.  Researchers are working to identify all of the genes that contribute to the features of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. They have determined that the loss of a particular gene on chromosome 22, TBX1, is probably responsible for many of the syndrome's characteristic signs (such as heart defects, a cleft palate, distinctive facial features, hearing loss, and low calcium levels). Some studies suggest that a deletion of this gene may contribute to behavioral problems as well. The loss of another gene, COMT, in the same region of chromosome 22 may also help explain the increased risk of behavioral problems and mental illness. The loss of additional genes in the deleted region likely contributes to the varied features of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Asymmetric crying face association  - Genetic Testing Registry: DiGeorge sequence  - Genetic Testing Registry: Opitz G/BBB syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Shprintzen syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care