Abdominal wall defects are uncommon. Omphalocele affects an estimated 2 to 2.5 in 10,000 newborns. Approximately 2 to 6 in 10,000 newborns are affected by gastroschisis, although researchers have observed that this malformation is becoming more common. Abdominal wall defects are more common among pregnancies that do not survive to term (miscarriages and stillbirths).
No genetic mutations are known to cause an abdominal wall defect. Multiple genetic and environmental factors likely influence the development of this disorder. Omphalocele and gastroschisis are caused by different errors in fetal development.  Omphalocele occurs during an error in digestive tract development. During the formation of the abdominal cavity in the sixth to tenth weeks of fetal development, the intestines normally protrude into the umbilical cord but recede back into the abdomen as development continues. Omphalocele occurs when the intestines do not recede back into the abdomen, but remain in the umbilical cord. Other abdominal organs can also protrude through this opening, resulting in the varied organ involvement that occurs in omphalocele.  The error that leads to gastroschisis formation is unknown. It is thought to be either a disruption in the blood flow to the digestive tract or a lack of development or injury to gastrointestinal tissue early in fetal development. For reasons that are unknown, women under the age of 20 are at the greatest risk of having a baby with gastroschisis. Other risk factors in pregnancy may include taking medications that constrict the blood vessels (called vasoconstrictive drugs) or smoking, although these risk factors have not been confirmed.
Most cases of abdominal wall defect are sporadic, which means they occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Multiple genetic and environmental factors likely play a part in determining the risk of developing this disorder.  When an abdominal wall defect, most often omphalocele, is a feature of a genetic condition, it is inherited in the pattern of that condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of abdominal wall defect:  - Cincinnati Children's Hospital: Gastroschisis  - Cincinnati Children's Hospital: Omphalocele  - Cleveland Clinic: Omphalocele  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital omphalocele  - Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children (UK): Gastroschisis  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Gastroschisis Repair  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Gastroschisis Repair--Series (images)  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Omphalocele Repair  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Omphalocele Repair--Series (images)  - Seattle Children's Hospital: Gastroschisis Treatment Options  - Seattle Children's Hospital: Omphalocele Treatment Options  - The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia: Diagnosis and Treatment of Gastroschisis  - The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia: Overview and Treatment of Omphalocele  - University of California, San Francisco Fetal Treatment Center: Gastroschisis  - University of California, San Francisco Fetal Treatment Center: Omphalocele   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care