Abetalipoproteinemia is a condition characterized by the inability to fully absorb dietary fats, cholesterol and fat-soluble vitamins. Signs and symptoms appear in the first few months of life and can include failure to thrive; diarrhea; acanthocytosis; and stool abnormalities. Other features develop later in childhood and often impair the function of the nervous system, potentially causing slower intellectual development; poor muscle coordination; progressive ataxia; and an eye disorder called retinitis pigmentosa. Most of the symptoms are due to defects in the absorption and transport of vitamin E. Abetalipoproteinemia is caused by mutations in the MTTP gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Early diagnosis, high-dose vitamin E therapy, and medium-chain fatty acid supplements may slow the progression of the nervous system abnormalities. Long-term outlook is reasonably good for most affected people who are diagnosed early. If left untreated, the condition can result in early death.
 The signs and symptoms of abetalipoproteinemia usually appear in the first few months of life. They can include: failure to thrive in infancy digestive symptoms such as diarrhea and steatorrhea (foul-smelling stools) abnormal, star-shaped red blood cells (acanthocytosis) nervous system (neurologic) symptoms beginning in childhood such as slower intellectual development; peripheral neuropathy; poor muscle coordination; ataxia; and intention tremors eye (ophthalmologic) symptoms such as decreased night and color vision; retinitis pigmentosa in adolescence; and gradual deterioration of vision, often leading to blindness in the fourth decade of life The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Abetalipoproteinemia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Malabsorption 90% Abnormality of movement 50% Abnormality of retinal pigmentation 50% Incoordination 50% Muscular hypotonia 50% Visual impairment 7.5% Abetalipoproteinemia - Acanthocytosis - Ataxia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - CNS demyelination - Fat malabsorption - Peripheral demyelination - Pigmentary retinal degeneration - Retinopathy - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Abetalipoproteinemia is caused by changes (mutations) in the MTTP gene. The MTTP gene gives the body instructions to make a protein needed for creating beta-lipoproteins. These lipoproteins are necessary for the body to absorb fats, cholesterol, and fat-soluble vitamins (vitamins A, D, E and K), and for transporting these substances in the blood. Mutations in the MTTP result in a lack of beta-lipoproteins, leading to an inability to absorb and transport these substances. This in turn leads to the nutritional and neurologic problems in affected people.
How  Abetalipoproteinemia is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that to be affected, a person must have a mutation in both copies of the responsible gene in each cell. Affected people inherit one mutated copy of the gene from each parent, who is referred to as a carrier. Carriers of an autosomal recessive condition typically do not have any signs or symptoms (they are unaffected). When 2 carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a: 25% (1 in 4) chance to be affected 50% (1 in 2) chance to be an unaffected carrier like each parent 25% chance to be unaffected and not be a carrier
 Yes. The Genetic Testing Registry (GTR) provides information about the genetic tests available for abetalipoproteinemia. The intended audience for the GTR is health care providers and researchers. Patients and consumers with specific questions about a genetic test should contact a health care provider or a genetics professional. Prenatal testing may also be available for pregnancies at increased risk if the mutations in the family have been identified.
 A nutritionist or other qualified medical professional should be consulted for specific dietary instruction in people with abetalipoproteinemia. Treatment involves very large doses of vitamin E, as well as large doses of vitamin supplements containing other fat-soluble vitamins (vitamin A, vitamin D, and vitamin K). Linoleic acid supplements are also recommended. Several diet changes and/or restrictions are also needed to prevent stomach problems. A low-fat diet may help with digestive symptoms; medium chain triglycerides may be used (under supervision of a specialist) as a source of fat in the diet. Management in adults typically focuses on specific complications associated with the disorder, and depends on the signs and symptoms present. Affected people may need consultations with several other types of specialists, including a lipidologist, gastroenterologist, hepatologist, ophthalmologist, and neurologist.
Abetalipoproteinemia is an inherited disorder that affects the absorption of dietary fats, cholesterol, and fat-soluble vitamins. People affected by this disorder are not able to make certain lipoproteins, which are particles that carry fats and fat-like substances (such as cholesterol) in the blood. Specifically, people with abetalipoproteinemia are missing a group of lipoproteins called beta-lipoproteins. An inability to make beta-lipoproteins causes severely reduced absorption (malabsorption) of dietary fats and fat-soluble vitamins (vitamins A, D, E, and K) from the digestive tract into the bloodstream. Sufficient levels of fats, cholesterol, and vitamins are necessary for normal growth, development, and maintenance of the body's cells and tissues, particularly nerve cells and tissues in the eye.  The signs and symptoms of abetalipoproteinemia appear in the first few months of life. They can include failure to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive); diarrhea; abnormal star-shaped red blood cells (acanthocytosis); and fatty, foul-smelling stools (steatorrhea). Other features of this disorder may develop later in childhood and often impair the function of the nervous system. Disturbances in nerve function may cause affected people to eventually develop poor muscle coordination and difficulty with balance and movement (ataxia). Individuals with this condition may also develop an eye disorder called retinitis pigmentosa, in which progressive degeneration of the light-sensitive layer (retina) at the back of the eye can cause vision loss. Adults in their thirties or forties may have increasing difficulty with balance and walking. Many of the signs and symptoms of abetalipoproteinemia result from a severe vitamin deficiency, especially a deficiency of vitamin E.
Abetalipoproteinemia is a rare disorder with approximately 100 cases described worldwide.
Mutations in the MTTP gene cause abetalipoproteinemia. The MTTP gene provides instructions for making a protein called microsomal triglyceride transfer protein, which is essential for creating beta-lipoproteins. These lipoproteins are necessary for the absorption of fats, cholesterol, and fat-soluble vitamins from the diet and the efficient transport of these substances in the bloodstream. Most of the mutations in the MTTP gene lead to the production of an abnormally short microsomal triglyceride transfer protein, which prevents the normal creation of beta-lipoproteins in the body. A lack of beta-lipoproteins causes the nutritional and neurological problems seen in people with abetalipoproteinemia.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of abetalipoproteinemia:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Abetalipoproteinaemia  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Bassen-Kornzweig syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Malabsorption  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Retinitis pigmentosa  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Stools - floating   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care