Addiction is a chronic disease in which a person craves, seeks, and continues to abuse a legal (medication, alcohol, tobacco) or an illicit (illegal) drug, despite harmful consequences. People who are addicted continue to abuse the substance even though it can harm their physical or mental health, lead to accidents, or put others in danger. For more on drugs and the brain, see  Drugs, Brains and Behavior: The Science of Addiction.
A persons behavior, especially changes in behavior, can signal a possible substance abuse problem. For example, you may notice that an older adult seems worried about whether a medicine is really working, or complains that a doctor refuses to write a prescription. He or she may have new problems doing everyday tasks or withdraw from family, friends, and normal activities. Other possible warning signs include - rapid increases in the amount of medication needed  - frequent requests for refills of certain medicines  - a person not seeming like themselves (showing a general lack of interest or being overly energetic)  - "doctor shopping" -- moving from provider to provider in an effort to get several prescriptions for the same medication  - use of more than one pharmacy  - false or forged prescriptions. rapid increases in the amount of medication needed frequent requests for refills of certain medicines a person not seeming like themselves (showing a general lack of interest or being overly energetic) "doctor shopping" -- moving from provider to provider in an effort to get several prescriptions for the same medication use of more than one pharmacy false or forged prescriptions.
Medications affect older people differently than younger people because aging changes how the body and brain handle these substances. As we age, our bodies change and cannot break down and get rid of substances as easily as before. This means that even a small amount of a medicine or a drug can have a strong effect. If you take medications the wrong way or abuse illicit drugs, this can have a serious effect on your health and make existing health problems worse. As people age, they may also become more sensitive to alcohols effects. For more information on the dangers of mixing alcohol and medicines, see Alcohol Use and Older Adults."
Although under federal law, marijuana is illegal to use under any circumstance, in some states doctors are allowed to prescribe it for medical use. However, solid data on marijuanas health benefits is lacking, and for smoked marijuana many health experts have concerns about the potential negative effects on the lungs and respiratory system. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has not approved smoked marijuana to treat any disease. They have approved two medications that are chemically similar to marijuana to treat wasting disease (extreme weight loss) in people with AIDS and to treat nausea and vomiting associated with cancer treatment.
If you take a medicine in a way that is different from what the doctor prescribed, it is called prescription drug abuse. It could be       - Taking a medicine that was prescribed for someone else    - Taking a larger dose than you are supposed to    - Taking the medicine in a different way than you are supposed to. This might be crushing tablets and then snorting or injecting them.    - Using the medicine for another purpose, such as getting high       Abusing some prescription drugs can lead to addiction. These include narcotic painkillers, sedatives, tranquilizers, and stimulants.    Every medicine has some risk of side effects. Doctors take this into account when prescribing medicines. People who abuse these drugs may not understand the risks. The medicines may not be safe for them, especially at higher doses or when taken with other medicines.     NIH: National Institute on Drug Abuse
Drug abuse is a serious public health problem that affects almost every community and family in some way. Each year drug abuse causes millions of serious illnesses or injuries among Americans. Abused drugs include       - Methamphetamine    - Anabolic steroids    - Club drugs    - Cocaine    - Heroin    - Inhalants    - Marijuana    - Prescription drugs       Drug abuse also plays a role in many major social problems, such as drugged driving, violence, stress, and child abuse. Drug abuse can lead to homelessness, crime, and missed work or problems with keeping a job. It harms unborn babies and destroys families. There are different types of treatment for drug abuse. But the best is to prevent drug abuse in the first place.     NIH: National Institute on Drug Abuse