Aceruloplasminemia is a disorder of iron metabolism. This disorder causes iron to build-up in the body. Signs and symptoms begin in adulthood. People with this disorder tend to develop anemia and diabetes in their 20's. As the condition progresses, movement problems are common, such as tremors, chorea, ataxia, eyelid twitching, and grimacing. Some experience psychiatric problems and dementia in their 40's and 50's. Eye examination may reveal changes in the retina, but these changes typically do not affect vision. Aceruloplasminemia is caused by mutations in the CP gene and are inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Aceruloplasminemia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal renal physiology 90% Abnormality of iron homeostasis 90% Anemia 90% Chorea 90% Diabetes mellitus 90% Retinopathy 90% Tremor 90% Behavioral abnormality 50% Developmental regression 50% Hypertonia 50% Incoordination 50% Neurological speech impairment 50% Congestive heart failure 7.5% Hypothyroidism 7.5% Memory impairment 7.5% Abnormality of extrapyramidal motor function - Adult onset - Ataxia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Blepharospasm - Cogwheel rigidity - Dementia - Dysarthria - Increased serum ferritin - Retinal degeneration - Scanning speech - Torticollis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 When a person has more than one of the following symptoms, aceruloplasminemia should be suspected: Diabetes mellitus Retinal degeneration Anemia Movement disorder Diagnosis can be further supported by MRI and pathology results demonstrating iron deposition in the body. People with aceruloplasminemia tend to have low serum copper (<10 ug/dL), low serum iron (< 45 ug/dL), high serum ferritin (850-4000 ng/mL) and absent serum ceruloplasmin concentration. Patients also tend to demonstrate altered serum ceruloplasmin ferroxidase activity. Genetic testing is available on a research basis.
Aceruloplasminemia is a disorder in which iron gradually accumulates in the brain and other organs. Iron accumulation in the brain results in neurological problems that generally appear in adulthood and worsen over time.  People with aceruloplasminemia develop a variety of movement problems. They may experience involuntary muscle contractions (dystonia) of the head and neck, resulting in repetitive movements and contortions. Other involuntary movements may also occur, such as rhythmic shaking (tremors), jerking movements (chorea), eyelid twitching (blepharospasm), and grimacing. Affected individuals may also have difficulty with coordination (ataxia). Some develop psychiatric problems and a decline of intellectual function (dementia) in their forties or fifties.  In addition to neurological problems, affected individuals may have diabetes mellitus caused by iron damage to cells in the pancreas that make insulin, a hormone that helps control blood sugar levels. Iron accumulation in the pancreas reduces the cells' ability to make insulin, which impairs blood sugar regulation and leads to the signs and symptoms of diabetes.  Iron accumulation in the tissues and organs results in a corresponding shortage (deficiency) of iron in the blood, leading to a shortage of red blood cells (anemia). Anemia and diabetes usually occur by the time an affected person is in his or her twenties.  Affected individuals also have changes in the light-sensitive tissue at the back of the eye (retina) caused by excess iron. The changes result in small opaque spots and areas of tissue degeneration (atrophy) around the edges of the retina. These abnormalities usually do not affect vision but can be observed during an eye examination.  The specific features of aceruloplasminemia and their severity may vary, even within the same family.
Aceruloplasminemia has been seen worldwide, but its overall prevalence is unknown. Studies in Japan have estimated that approximately 1 in 2 million adults in this population are affected.
Mutations in the CP gene cause aceruloplasminemia. The CP gene provides instructions for making a protein called ceruloplasmin, which is involved in iron transport and processing. Ceruloplasmin helps move iron from the organs and tissues of the body and prepares it for incorporation into a molecule called transferrin, which transports it to red blood cells to help carry oxygen.  CP gene mutations result in the production of ceruloplasmin protein that is unstable or nonfunctional, or they prevent the protein from being released (secreted) by the cells in which it is made. When ceruloplasmin is unavailable, transport of iron out of the body's tissues is impaired. The resulting iron accumulation damages cells in those tissues, leading to neurological dysfunction, and the other health problems seen in aceruloplasminemia.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of aceruloplasminemia:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Aceruloplasminemia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Deficiency of ferroxidase   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care