Familial esophageal achalasia refers to a cluster of achalasia within a family. Achalasia is a condition that affects the esophagus, the tube that carries food from the mouth to the stomach. In people with achalasia, the normal muscle activity of the esophagus is reduced and the muscular valve where the esophagus and the stomach meet doesn't fully relax. This makes it difficult for food to move from the esophagus to the stomach. As a result, people with achalasia may experience regurgitation of food, chest pain, cough, difficulty swallowing, heartburn, and/or unintentional weight loss. Reports of familial esophageal achalasia are rare and represent less than 1% of all achalasia cases. In these families, the underlying genetic cause of the condition is unknown, but it appears to be inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment aims to allow food to pass more easily into this stomach and may include injections with botulinum toxin (Botox), certain medications and/or surgery.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Familial esophageal achalasia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Achalasia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Keratoconjunctivitis sicca - Rheumatoid arthritis - Xerostomia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Achalasia is a disorder of the esophagus, the tube that carries food from the mouth to the stomach. It is characterized by enlargement of the esophagus, impaired ability of the esophagus to push food down toward the stomach (peristalsis), and failure of the ring-shaped muscle at the bottom of the esophagus (the lower esophageal sphincter) to relax. Achalasia is typically diagnosed in individuals between 25 and 60 years of age. The exact etiology is unknown, however, symptoms are caused by damage to the nerves of the esophagus. Familial studies have shown evidence of a potential genetic influence. When a genetic influence is suspected, achalasia is called familial esophageal achalasia. Treatment is aimed at reducing the pressure at the lower esophageal sphincter and may include Botox, medications, or surgery.
 Most people with achalasia experience difficulty swallowing, also known as dysphagia and heartburn. Other symptoms might include: regurgitation or vomiting, noncardiac chest pain, odynophagia (painful swallowing), and pain in the upper central region of the abdomen. Non esophageal symptoms might include: coughing or asthma, chronic aspiration (breathing a foreign object such as food into the airway), hoarseness or sore throat, and unintentional weight loss.
 The lower esophageal sphincter, the ring-shaped muscle at the bottom of the esophagus, normally relaxes during swallowing. In people with achalasia, this muscle ring does not relax as well. The reason for this problem is damage to the nerves of the esophagus. In some people, this problem appears to be inherited. There is additionally a suspected autoimmune component involved in the development of achalasia as individuals with achalasia are more likely to have a concomitant autoimmune disease than the general population.
 Achalasia is suspected in individuals with dysphagia (difficulty swallowing) and in instances where regurgitation symptoms are not responsive to protein pump inhibitor medication.  The diagnosis of achalasia is confirmed by manometry (test that measures how well the esophagus is working); however, other tests such as upper endoscopy and upper GI X-ray can additionally be useful.
 The aim of treatment is to reduce the pressure at the lower esophageal sphincter. Therapy may involve: Injection with botulinum toxin (Botox) to help relax the sphincter muscles (used as a temporary fix)  Medications, such as long-acting nitrates (i.e. isosorbide dinitrate) or calcium channel blockers (i.e. nifedipine), to relax the lower esophagus sphincter Surgery (Heller myotomy) to decrease the pressure in the lower sphincter Pneumatic balloon dilation of the esophagus at the location of the narrowing (done during esophagogastroduodenoscopy) You can learn more about these treatment options by clicking on the following links: eMedicine Esophageal Motility Disorders Merck Manuals Motility Disorders A doctor should help to determine the best treatment for each individual situation.