Achondrogenesis is a group of severe disorders that are present from birth and affect the development of cartilage and bone. Infants with achondrogenesis usually have a small body, short arms and legs, and other skeletal abnormalities that cause life-threatening complications.  There are at least three forms of achondrogenesis, type 1A, type 1B and type 2, which are distinguished by signs and symptoms, pattern of inheritance, and the results of imaging studies such as x-rays (radiology), tissue analysis (histology), and genetic testing.  Type 1A and 1B achondrogenesis are both inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.  Type 1B may be caused by mutations in the SLC26A2 gene.  Type 2 achondrogenesis is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern and is caused by new (de novo) mutations in the COL2A1 gene.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Achondrogenesis type 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of bone mineral density 90% Anteverted nares 90% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the lungs 90% Frontal bossing 90% Hydrops fetalis 90% Long philtrum 90% Macrocephaly 90% Malar flattening 90% Micromelia 90% Narrow chest 90% Short neck 90% Short nose 90% Short stature 90% Short thorax 90% Skeletal dysplasia 90% Thickened nuchal skin fold 90% Polyhydramnios 50% Umbilical hernia 50% Cystic hygroma 7.5% Postaxial hand polydactyly 7.5% Abdominal distention - Abnormality of the foot - Absent vertebral body mineralization - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Barrel-shaped chest - Broad long bones - Cleft palate - Disproportionate short-limb short stature - Disproportionate short-trunk short stature - Edema - Horizontal ribs - Hypoplastic iliac wing - Short long bone - Short ribs - Short tubular bones (hand) - Stillbirth - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Achondrogenesis is a group of severe disorders that are present from birth and affect the development of cartilage and bone. Infants with achondrogenesis usually have a small body, short arms and legs, and other skeletal abnormalities that cause life-threatening complications.  There are at least three forms of achondrogenesis, type 1A, type 1B and type 2, which are distinguished by signs and symptoms, pattern of inheritance, and the results of imaging studies such as x-rays (radiology), tissue analysis (histology), and genetic testing.  Type 1A and 1B achondrogenesis are both inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.  Type 1B may be caused by mutations in the SLC26A2 gene.  Type 2 achondrogenesis is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern and is caused by new (de novo) mutations in the COL2A1 gene.
 Research has shown that changes (mutations) in the SLC26A2 and COL2A1 genes cause achondrogenesis types 1B and 2, respectively. The genetic cause of achondrogenesis type 1A remains unknown.  The SLC26A2 gene provides instructions for making a protein that is important for the normal development of cartilage and for the conversion of cartilage to bone. The COL2A1 gene provides instructions for making a protein that forms a type of collagen found mostly in cartilage and in the clear gel that fills the eyeball (vitreous).  Mutations in these genes result in the production of proteins that are unable to properly perform their jobs within the body.
How  Achondrogenesis type 1A and type 1B are believed to be inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.  Autosomal recessive inheritance means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations.  Most often, the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Achondrogenesis type 2 is considered an autosomal dominant disorder because one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. It is almost always caused by new (de novo) mutations and typically occurs in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
 Genetic testing can help distinguish between the different types of achondrogenesis. GeneTests lists the names of laboratories that are performing genetic testing for achondrogenesis type 1B and type 2. Please note: Most of the laboratories listed through GeneTests do not accept direct contact from patients and their families; therefore, if you are interested in learning more, you will need to work with a health care provider or a genetics professional. In the Services tab, we provide a list of online resources that can assist you in locating a genetics professional near you.
Achondrogenesis is a group of severe disorders that are present from birth and affect the development of cartilage and bone. Infants with achondrogenesis usually have a small body, short arms and legs, and other skeletal abnormalities that cause life-threatening complications.  There are at least three forms of achondrogenesis, type 1A, type 1B and type 2, which are distinguished by signs and symptoms, pattern of inheritance, and the results of imaging studies such as x-rays (radiology), tissue analysis (histology), and genetic testing.  Type 1A and 1B achondrogenesis are both inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.  Type 1B may be caused by mutations in the SLC26A2 gene.  Type 2 achondrogenesis is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern and is caused by new (de novo) mutations in the COL2A1 gene.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Achondrogenesis type 1A. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of bone mineral density 90% Anteverted nares 90% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the lungs 90% Frontal bossing 90% Hydrops fetalis 90% Long philtrum 90% Macrocephaly 90% Malar flattening 90% Micromelia 90% Narrow chest 90% Short neck 90% Short nose 90% Short thorax 90% Skeletal dysplasia 90% Thickened nuchal skin fold 90% Brachydactyly syndrome 50% Polyhydramnios 50% Recurrent fractures 50% Short toe 50% Umbilical hernia 50% Cystic hygroma 7.5% Abnormal foot bone ossification - Abnormal hand bone ossification - Abnormality of the femoral metaphysis - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Barrel-shaped chest - Beaded ribs - Broad clavicles - Decreased skull ossification - Depressed nasal bridge - Disproportionate short-trunk short stature - Hypoplasia of the radius - Hypoplastic ischia - Hypoplastic scapulae - Protuberant abdomen - Short clavicles - Short ribs - Stillbirth - Unossified vertebral bodies - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Achondrogenesis is a group of severe disorders that affect cartilage and bone development. These conditions are characterized by a small body, short limbs, and other skeletal abnormalities. As a result of serious health problems, infants with achondrogenesis usually die before birth, are stillborn, or die soon after birth from respiratory failure. However, some infants have lived for a short time with intensive medical support.  Researchers have described at least three forms of achondrogenesis, designated as type 1A, type 1B, and type 2. The types are distinguished by their signs and symptoms, inheritance pattern, and genetic cause. However, types 1A and 1B are often hard to tell apart without genetic testing.  Achondrogenesis type 1A, which is also called the Houston-Harris type, is the least well understood of the three forms. Affected infants have extremely short limbs, a narrow chest, short ribs that fracture easily, and a lack of normal bone formation (ossification) in the skull, spine, and pelvis.  Achondrogenesis type 1B, also known as the Parenti-Fraccaro type, is characterized by extremely short limbs, a narrow chest, and a prominent, rounded abdomen. The fingers and toes are short and the feet may turn inward and upward (clubfeet). Affected infants frequently have a soft out-pouching around the belly-button (an umbilical hernia) or near the groin (an inguinal hernia).  Infants with achondrogenesis type 2, which is sometimes called the Langer-Saldino type, have short arms and legs, a narrow chest with short ribs, and underdeveloped lungs. This condition is also associated with a lack of ossification in the spine and pelvis. Distinctive facial features include a prominent forehead, a small chin, and, in some cases, an opening in the roof of the mouth (a cleft palate). The abdomen is enlarged, and affected infants often have a condition called hydrops fetalis, in which excess fluid builds up in the body before birth.
Achondrogenesis types 1A and 1B are rare genetic disorders; their incidence is unknown. Combined, achondrogenesis type 2 and hypochondrogenesis (a similar skeletal disorder) occur in 1 in 40,000 to 60,000 newborns.
Mutations in the TRIP11, SLC26A2, and COL2A1 genes cause achondrogenesis type 1A, type 1B, and type 2, respectively.  The genetic cause of achondrogenesis type 1A was unknown until recently, when researchers discovered that the condition can result from mutations in the TRIP11 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called GMAP-210. This protein plays a critical role in the Golgi apparatus, a cell structure in which newly produced proteins are modified so they can carry out their functions. Mutations in the TRIP11 gene prevent the production of functional GMAP-210, which alters the structure and function of the Golgi apparatus. Researchers suspect that cells called chondrocytes in the developing skeleton may be most sensitive to these changes. Chondrocytes give rise to cartilage, a tough, flexible tissue that makes up much of the skeleton during early development. Most cartilage is later converted to bone, except for the cartilage that continues to cover and protect the ends of bones and is present in the nose and external ears. Malfunction of the Golgi apparatus in chondrocytes likely underlies the problems with bone formation in achondrogenesis type 1A.  Achondrogenesis type 1B is the most severe of a spectrum of skeletal disorders caused by mutations in the SLC26A2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is essential for the normal development of cartilage and for its conversion to bone. Mutations in the SLC26A2 gene cause the skeletal problems characteristic of achondrogenesis type 1B by disrupting the structure of developing cartilage, which prevents bones from forming properly.  Achondrogenesis type 2 is one of several skeletal disorders that result from mutations in the COL2A1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that forms type II collagen. This type of collagen is found mostly in cartilage and in the clear gel that fills the eyeball (the vitreous). It is essential for the normal development of bones and other connective tissues that form the body's supportive framework. Mutations in the COL2A1 gene interfere with the assembly of type II collagen molecules, which prevents bones and other connective tissues from developing properly.
Achondrogenesis type 1A and type 1B both have an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance, which means both copies of the TRIP11 or SLC26A2 gene in each cell have mutations. Most often, the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene but do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.  Achondrogenesis type 2 is considered an autosomal dominant disorder because one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. It is almost always caused by new mutations in the COL2A1 gene and typically occurs in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of achondrogenesis:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Achondrogenesis Type 1B  - Genetic Testing Registry: Achondrogenesis type 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Achondrogenesis, type IA  - Genetic Testing Registry: Achondrogenesis, type IB  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Achondrogenesis   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care