Achondroplasia is a disorder of bone growth that prevents the changing of cartilage (particularly in the long bones of the arms and legs) to bone. It is characterized by dwarfism, limited range of motion at the elbows, large head size, small fingers, and normal intelligence. Achondroplasia can cause health complications such as apnea, obesity, recurrent ear infections, and lordosis of the spine. Achondroplasia is caused by mutations in the FGFR3 gene. It is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion.
 Achondroplasia is caused by mutations in the FGFR3 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is involved in the development and maintenance of bone and brain tissue. Two specific mutations in the FGFR3 gene are responsible for almost all cases of achondroplasia. Researchers believe that these mutations cause the FGFR3 protein to be overly active, which interferes with skeletal development and leads to the disturbances in bone growth seen in this condition.
 Most cases of achondroplasia are not inherited. When it is inherited, it follows an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. About 80% of individuals who have achondroplasia have parents with normal stature and are born with the condition as a result of a new (de novo) gene alteration (mutation). Each individual with achondroplasia has a 50% chance, with each pregnancy, to pass on the mutated gene.
 Recommendations for management of children with achondroplasia were outlined by the American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Genetics in the article, Health Supervision for Children with Achondroplasia. We recommend that you review this article with your childs health care provider(s). These recommendations include:  Monitoring of height, weight, and head circumference using growth curves standardized for achondroplasia  Measures to avoid obesity starting in early childhood.  Careful neurologic examinations, with referral to a pediatric neurologist as necessary  MRI or CT of the foramen magnum region for evaluation of severe hypotonia or signs of spinal cord compression  Obtaining history for possible sleep apnea, with sleep studies as necessary  Evaluation for low thoracic or high lumbar gibbus if truncal weakness is present  Referral to a pediatric orthopedist if bowing of the legs interferes with walking  Management of frequent middle-ear infections  Speech evaluation by age two years  Careful monitoring of social adjustment The GeneReview article on achondroplasia also provides information on medical management.  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1152/#achondroplasia.Management
Achondroplasia is a form of short-limbed dwarfism. The word achondroplasia literally means "without cartilage formation." Cartilage is a tough but flexible tissue that makes up much of the skeleton during early development. However, in achondroplasia the problem is not in forming cartilage but in converting it to bone (a process called ossification), particularly in the long bones of the arms and legs. Achondroplasia is similar to another skeletal disorder called hypochondroplasia, but the features of achondroplasia tend to be more severe.  All people with achondroplasia have short stature. The average height of an adult male with achondroplasia is 131 centimeters (4 feet, 4 inches), and the average height for adult females is 124 centimeters (4 feet, 1 inch). Characteristic features of achondroplasia include an average-size trunk, short arms and legs with particularly short upper arms and thighs, limited range of motion at the elbows, and an enlarged head (macrocephaly) with a prominent forehead. Fingers are typically short and the ring finger and middle finger may diverge, giving the hand a three-pronged (trident) appearance. People with achondroplasia are generally of normal intelligence.  Health problems commonly associated with achondroplasia include episodes in which breathing slows or stops for short periods (apnea), obesity, and recurrent ear infections. In childhood, individuals with the condition usually develop a pronounced and permanent sway of the lower back (lordosis) and bowed legs. Some affected people also develop abnormal front-to-back curvature of the spine (kyphosis) and back pain. A potentially serious complication of achondroplasia is spinal stenosis, which is a narrowing of the spinal canal that can pinch (compress) the upper part of the spinal cord. Spinal stenosis is associated with pain, tingling, and weakness in the legs that can cause difficulty with walking. Another uncommon but serious complication of achondroplasia is hydrocephalus, which is a buildup of fluid in the brain in affected children that can lead to increased head size and related brain abnormalities.
Achondroplasia is the most common type of short-limbed dwarfism. The condition occurs in 1 in 15,000 to 40,000 newborns.
Mutations in the FGFR3 gene cause achondroplasia. The FGFR3 gene provides instructions for making a protein that is involved in the development and maintenance of bone and brain tissue. Two specific mutations in the FGFR3 gene are responsible for almost all cases of achondroplasia. Researchers believe that these mutations cause the FGFR3 protein to be overly active, which interferes with skeletal development and leads to the disturbances in bone growth seen with this disorder.
Achondroplasia is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. About 80 percent of people with achondroplasia have average-size parents; these cases result from new mutations in the FGFR3 gene. In the remaining cases, people with achondroplasia have inherited an altered FGFR3 gene from one or two affected parents. Individuals who inherit two altered copies of this gene typically have a severe form of achondroplasia that causes extreme shortening of the bones and an underdeveloped rib cage. These individuals are usually stillborn or die shortly after birth from respiratory failure.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of achondroplasia:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Achondroplasia  - GeneFacts: Achondroplasia: Diagnosis  - GeneFacts: Achondroplasia: Management  - Genetic Testing Registry: Achondroplasia  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Achondroplasia  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hydrocephalus  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Lordosis  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Spinal Stenosis   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care