The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Methylmalonic acidemia with homocystinuria. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the oral cavity 90% Anorexia 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Feeding difficulties in infancy 90% Hydrocephalus 90% Megaloblastic anemia 90% Microcephaly 90% Muscular hypotonia 90% Pallor 90% Reduced consciousness/confusion 90% Retinopathy 90% Seizures 90% Behavioral abnormality 50% Gait disturbance 50% Infantile onset 50% Skin rash 7.5% Abnormality of extrapyramidal motor function - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cerebral cortical atrophy - Confusion - Cystathioninemia - Cystathioninuria - Decreased adenosylcobalamin - Decreased methionine synthase activity - Decreased methylcobalamin - Decreased methylmalonyl-CoA mutase activity - Dementia - Failure to thrive - Hematuria - Hemolytic-uremic syndrome - High forehead - Homocystinuria - Hyperhomocystinemia - Hypomethioninemia - Intellectual disability - Lethargy - Long face - Low-set ears - Macrotia - Metabolic acidosis - Methylmalonic acidemia - Methylmalonic aciduria - Nephropathy - Neutropenia - Nystagmus - Pigmentary retinopathy - Proteinuria - Reduced visual acuity - Renal insufficiency - Smooth philtrum - Thrombocytopenia - Thromboembolism - Tremor - Visual impairment - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Methylmalonic academia with homocystinuria (MMA+HCU) cblC is a genetic disorder that prevents the body from breaking down certain amino acids found in protein (i.e., isoleucine, valine, methionine, and threonine). As a result, homocystine, methylmalonic acid, and other harmful substances build-up in the body. Treatment should begin as soon as possible. In general, treatment may involve a low-protein diet, medical formula/drink, regular meals, careful monitoring, and vitamin B12 shots. Most US states now offer newborn screening for MMA+HCU, allowing for early detection and treatment. However even with early treatment, most children with MMA+HCU experience some symptoms affecting vision, growth, and learning. MMA+HCU cblC type is caused by changes in the MMACHC gene. It is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Methylmalonic acidemia with homocystinuria, type cblJ. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Atria septal defect 5% Cerebral atrophy 5% Coarctation of aorta 5% Cryptorchidism 5% Decreased methionine synthase activity 5% Decreased methylcobalamin 5% Gastroesophageal reflux 5% Hypertelorism 5% Pulmonary hypertension 5% Wide intermamillary distance 5% Abnormal posturing - Anemia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Congenital onset - Decreased adenosylcobalamin - Feeding difficulties - Growth delay - Homocystinuria - Hyperhomocystinemia - Inguinal hernia - Lethargy - Methylmalonic acidemia - Methylmalonic aciduria - Muscular hypotonia - Neutropenia - Tachypnea - Thrombocytopenia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Methylmalonic acidemia is an inherited disorder in which the body is unable to process certain proteins and fats (lipids) properly. The effects of methylmalonic acidemia, which usually appear in early infancy, vary from mild to life-threatening. Affected infants can experience vomiting, dehydration, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), developmental delay, excessive tiredness (lethargy), an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly), and failure to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive). Long-term complications can include feeding problems, intellectual disability, chronic kidney disease, and inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis). Without treatment, this disorder can lead to coma and death in some cases.
This condition occurs in an estimated 1 in 50,000 to 100,000 people.
Mutations in the MUT, MMAA, MMAB, MMADHC, and MCEE genes cause methylmalonic acidemia. The long term effects of methylmalonic acidemia depend on which gene is mutated and the severity of the mutation.  About 60 percent of methylmalonic acidemia cases are caused by mutations in the MUT gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called methylmalonyl CoA mutase. This enzyme works with vitamin B12 (also called cobalamin) to break down several protein building blocks (amino acids), certain lipids, and cholesterol. Mutations in the MUT gene alter the enzyme's structure or reduce the amount of the enzyme, which prevents these molecules from being broken down properly. As a result, a substance called methylmalonyl CoA and other potentially toxic compounds can accumulate in the body's organs and tissues, causing the signs and symptoms of methylmalonic acidemia.  Mutations in the MUT gene that prevent the production of any functional enzyme result in a form of the condition designated mut0. Mut0 is the most severe form of methylmalonic acidemia and has the poorest outcome. Mutations that change the structure of methylmalonyl CoA mutase but do not eliminate its activity cause a form of the condition designated mut-. The mut- form is typically less severe, with more variable symptoms than the mut0 form.  Some cases of methylmalonic acidemia are caused by mutations in the MMAA, MMAB, or MMADHC gene. Proteins produced from the MMAA, MMAB, and MMADHC genes are needed for the proper function of methylmalonyl CoA mutase. Mutations that affect proteins produced from these three genes can impair the activity of methylmalonyl CoA mutase, leading to methylmalonic acidemia.  A few other cases of methylmalonic acidemia are caused by mutations in the MCEE gene. This gene provides instructions for producing an enzyme called methylmalonyl CoA epimerase. Like methylmalonyl CoA mutase, this enzyme also plays a role in the breakdown of amino acids, certain lipids, and cholesterol. Disruption in the function of methylmalonyl CoA epimerase leads to a mild form of methylmalonic acidemia.  It is likely that mutations in other, unidentified genes also cause methylmalonic acidemia.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the MUT, MMAA, MMAB, MMADHC, or MCEE gene in each cell have mutations. Most often, the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition are carriers of one copy of the mutated gene but do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of methylmalonic acidemia:  - Baby's First Test: Methylmalonic Acidemia (Cobalamin Disorders)  - Baby's First Test: Methylmalonic Acidemia (Methymalonyl-CoA Mutase Deficiency)  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Isolated Methylmalonic Acidemia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Methylmalonic acidemia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Methylmalonic acidemia with homocystinuria cblD  - Genetic Testing Registry: Methylmalonic aciduria cblA type  - Genetic Testing Registry: Methylmalonic aciduria cblB type  - Genetic Testing Registry: Methylmalonic aciduria due to methylmalonyl-CoA mutase deficiency  - Genetic Testing Registry: Methylmalonyl-CoA epimerase deficiency  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Methylmalonic acid  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Methylmalonic acidemia  - New England Consortium of Metabolic Programs   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Methylmalonic acidemia with homocystinuria is an inherited disorder in which the body is unable to properly process protein building blocks (amino acids), certain fats (lipids), and a waxy fat-like substance called cholesterol. Individuals with this disorder have a combination of features from two separate conditions, methylmalonic acidemia and homocystinuria. The signs and symptoms of the combined condition, methylmalonic acidemia with homocystinuria, usually develop in infancy, although they can begin at any age.  When the condition begins early in life, affected individuals typically have an inability to grow and gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive), which is sometimes recognized before birth (intrauterine growth retardation). These infants can also have difficulty feeding and an abnormally pale appearance (pallor). Neurological problems are also common in methylmalonic acidemia with homocystinuria, including weak muscle tone (hypotonia) and seizures. Most infants and children with this condition have an unusually small head size (microcephaly), delayed development, and intellectual disability. Less common features of the condition include eye problems and a blood disorder called megaloblastic anemia. Megaloblastic anemia occurs when a person has a low number of red blood cells (anemia), and the remaining red blood cells are larger than normal (megaloblastic). The signs and symptoms of methylmalonic acidemia with homocystinuria worsen over time, and the condition can be life-threatening if not treated.  When methylmalonic acidemia with homocystinuria begins in adolescence or adulthood, the signs and symptoms usually include psychiatric changes and cognitive problems. Affected individuals can exhibit changes in their behavior and personality; they may become less social and may experience hallucinations, delirium, and psychosis. In addition, these individuals can begin to lose previously acquired mental and movement abilities, resulting in a decline in school or work performance, difficulty controlling movements, memory problems, speech difficulties, a decline in intellectual function (dementia), or an extreme lack of energy (lethargy). Some people with methylmalonic acidemia with homocystinuria whose signs and symptoms begin later in life develop a condition called subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord, which leads to numbness and weakness in the lower limbs, difficulty walking, and frequent falls.
The most common form of the condition, called methylmalonic acidemia with homocystinuria, cblC type, is estimated to affect 1 in 200,000 newborns worldwide. Studies indicate that this form of the condition may be even more common in particular populations. These studies estimate the condition occurs in 1 in 100,000 people in New York and 1 in 60,000 people in California. Other types of methylmalonic acidemia with homocystinuria are much less common. Fewer than 20 cases of each of the other types have been reported in the medical literature.
Methylmalonic acidemia with homocystinuria can be caused by mutations in one of several genes: MMACHC, MMADHC, LMBRD1, ABCD4, or HCFC1. Mutations in these genes account for the different types of the disorder, which are known as complementation groups: cblC, cblD, cblF, cblJ, and cblX, respectively.  Each of the above-mentioned genes is involved in the processing of vitamin B12, also known as cobalamin or Cbl. Processing of the vitamin converts it to one of two molecules, adenosylcobalamin (AdoCbl) or methylcobalamin (MeCbl). AdoCbl is required for the normal function of an enzyme that helps break down certain amino acids, lipids, and cholesterol. AdoCbl is called a cofactor because it helps the enzyme carry out its function. MeCbl is also a cofactor, but for another enzyme that converts the amino acid homocysteine to another amino acid, methionine. The body uses methionine to make proteins and other important compounds.  Mutations in the MMACHC, MMADHC, LMBRD1, ABCD4, or HCFC1 gene affect early steps of vitamin B12 processing, resulting in a shortage of both AdoCbl and MeCbl. Without AdoCbl, proteins and lipids are not broken down properly. This defect allows potentially toxic compounds to build up in the body's organs and tissues, causing methylmalonic acidemia. Without MeCbl, homocysteine is not converted to methionine. As a result, homocysteine builds up in the bloodstream and methionine is depleted. Some of the excess homocysteine is excreted in urine (homocystinuria). Researchers have not determined how altered levels of homocysteine and methionine lead to the health problems associated with homocystinuria.  Mutations in other genes involved in vitamin B12 processing can cause related conditions. Those mutations that impair only AdoCbl production lead to methylmalonic acidemia, and those that impair only MeCbl production cause homocystinuria.
Methylmalonic acidemia with homocystinuria is usually inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.  When caused by mutations in the HCFC1 gene, the condition is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. The HCFC1 gene is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of methylmalonic acidemia with homocystinuria:  - Baby's First Test: Methylmalonic Acidemia with Homocystinuria  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Disorders of Intracellular Cobalamin Metabolism  - Genetic Testing Registry: METHYLMALONIC ACIDURIA AND HOMOCYSTINURIA, cblF TYPE  - Genetic Testing Registry: METHYLMALONIC ACIDURIA AND HOMOCYSTINURIA, cblJ TYPE  - Genetic Testing Registry: Methylmalonic acidemia with homocystinuria  - Genetic Testing Registry: Methylmalonic acidemia with homocystinuria cblD   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care