Acromegaly is a hormonal disorder that results from the pituitary gland producing too much growth hormone (GH). It is most often diagnosed in middle-aged adults, although symptoms can appear at any age. Signs and symptoms include abnormal growth and swelling of the hands and feet; bone changes that alter various facial features; arthritis; carpal tunnel syndrome; enlargement of body organs; and various other symptoms. The condition is usually caused by benign tumors on the pituitary called adenomas. Rarely, it is caused by tumors of the pancreas, lungs, and other parts of the brain. Acromegaly is usually treatable but when left untreated, it can result in serious illness and premature death. When GH-producing tumors occur in childhood, the disease that results is called gigantism rather than acromegaly.
The name acromegaly comes from the Greek words for "extremities" and "enlargement," reflecting one of its most common symptomsthe abnormal growth of the hands and feet. Swelling of the hands and feet is often an early feature, with patients noticing a change in ring or shoe size, particularly shoe width. Gradually, bone changes alter the patient's facial features: The brow and lower jaw protrude, the nasal bone enlarges, and the teeth space out.
                
Overgrowth of bone and cartilage often leads to arthritis. When tissue thickens, it may trap nerves, causing carpal tunnel syndrome, which results in numbness and weakness of the hands. Body organs, including the heart, may enlarge.
                
Other symptoms of acromegaly include
                
- joint aches  - thick, coarse, oily skin  - skin tags  - enlarged lips, nose, and tongue  - deepening of the voice due to enlarged sinuses and vocal cords  - sleep apnea-breaks in breathing during sleep due to obstruction of the airway  - excessive sweating and skin odor  - fatigue and weakness  - headaches  - impaired vision  - abnormalities of the menstrual cycle and sometimes breast discharge in women  - erectile dysfunction in men  - decreased libido
Small pituitary adenomas are common, affecting about 17 percent of the population.1 However, research suggests most of these tumors do not cause symptoms and rarely produce excess GH.2 Scientists estimate that three to four out of every million people develop acromegaly each year and about 60 out of every million people suffer from the disease at any time.3 Because the clinical diagnosis of acromegaly is often missed, these numbers probably underestimate the frequency of the disease.
No single treatment is effective for all patients. Treatment should be individualized, and often combined, depending on patient characteristics such as age and tumor size.
                
If the tumor has not yet invaded surrounding nonpituitary tissues, removal of the pituitary adenoma by an experienced neurosurgeon is usually the first choice. Even if a cure is not possible, surgery may be performed if the patient has symptoms of neurological problems such as loss of peripheral vision or cranial nerve problems. After surgery, hormone levels are measured to determine whether a cure has been achieved. This determination can take up to 8 weeks because IGF-I lasts a long time in the body's circulation. If cured, a patient must be monitored for a long time for increasing GH levels.
                
If surgery does not normalize hormone levels or a relapse occurs, an endocrinologist should recommend additional drug therapy. With each medication, long-term therapy is necessary because their withdrawal can lead to rising GH levels and tumor re-expansion.
                
Radiation therapy is generally reserved for patients whose tumors are not completely removed by surgery, who are not good candidates for surgery because of other health problems, or who do not respond adequately to surgery and medication.
- Acromegaly is a hormonal disorder that results from too much growth hormone (GH) in the body.  - In most people with acromegaly, a benign tumor of the pituitary gland produces excess GH.  - Common features of acromegaly include abnormal growth of the hands and feet; bone growth in the face that leads to a protruding lower jaw and brow and an enlarged nasal bone; joint aches; thick, coarse, oily skin; and enlarged lips, nose, and tongue.  - Acromegaly can cause sleep apnea, fatigue and weakness, headaches, impaired vision, menstrual abnormalities in women, and erectile dysfunction in men.  - Acromegaly is diagnosed through a blood test. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pituitary is then used to locate and detect the size of the tumor causing GH overproduction.  - The first line of treatment is usually surgical removal of the tumor. Medication or radiation may be used instead of or in addition to surgery.