The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of metabolism/homeostasis 90% Abnormality of movement 90% Abnormality of the liver 90% Abnormality of the palate 90% Anteverted nares 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Developmental regression 90% Dolichocephaly 90% EEG abnormality 90% High forehead 90% Hyperreflexia 90% Low-set, posteriorly rotated ears 90% Muscular hypotonia 90% Nystagmus 90% Optic atrophy 90% Primary adrenal insufficiency 90% Seizures 90% Sensorineural hearing impairment 90% Short stature 90% Strabismus 90% Abnormality of neuronal migration 50% Abnormality of retinal pigmentation 50% Abnormality of the fontanelles or cranial sutures 50% Cataract 50% Macrocephaly 50% Ptosis 50% Single transverse palmar crease 50% Visual impairment 50% Abnormal facial shape - Adrenal insufficiency - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Elevated long chain fatty acids - Epicanthus - Esotropia - Frontal bossing - High palate - Intellectual disability - Low-set ears - Polar cataract - Wide nasal bridge - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Childhood-onset cerebral X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the skeletal system - Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder - Blindness - Bowel incontinence - Bulbar palsy - Dementia - Elevated long chain fatty acids - Hearing impairment - Hyperpigmentation of the skin - Hypogonadism - Impotence - Incoordination - Limb ataxia - Loss of speech - Neurodegeneration - Paraparesis - Polyneuropathy - Primary adrenal insufficiency - Progressive - Psychosis - Seizures - Slurred speech - Spastic paraplegia - Truncal ataxia - Urinary bladder sphincter dysfunction - Urinary incontinence - Visual loss - X-linked recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
X-linked Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is one of a group of genetic disorders called the leukodystrophies that cause damage to the myelin sheath, an insulating membrane that surrounds nerve cells in the brain. Women have two X chromosomes and are the carriers of the disease, but since men only have one X chromosome and lack the protective effect of the extra X chromosome, they are more severely affected. People with X-ALD accumulate high levels of saturated, very long chain fatty acids (VLCFA) in the brain and adrenal cortex. The loss of myelin and the progressive dysfunction of the adrenal gland are the primary characteristics of X-ALD. While nearly all patients with X-ALD suffer from adrenal insufficiency, also known as Addison's disease, the neurological symptoms can begin either in childhood or in adulthood. The childhood cerebral form is the most severe, with onset between ages 4 and 10. The most common symptoms are usually behavioral changes such as abnormal withdrawal or aggression, poor memory, and poor school performance. Other symptoms include visual loss, learning disabilities, seizures, poorly articulated speech, difficulty swallowing, deafness, disturbances of gait and coordination, fatigue, intermittent vomiting, increased skin pigmentation, and progressive dementia. The milder adult-onset form is also known as adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN), which typically begins between ages 21 and 35. Symptoms may include progressive stiffness, weakness or paralysis of the lower limbs, and ataxia. Although adult-onset ALD progresses more slowly than the classic childhood form, it can also result in deterioration of brain function. Almost half the women who are carriers of X-ALS will develop a milder form of AMN but almost never will develop symptoms seen in boys the X-ALD. X-ALD should not be confused with neonatal adrenoleukodsystrophy, which is a disease of newborns and young infants and belongs to the group of peroxisomal biogenesis disorders.
Adrenal function must be tested periodically in all patients with ALD. Treatment with adrenal hormones can be lifesaving. Symptomatic and supportive treatments for ALD include physical therapy, psychological support, and special education. Recent evidence suggests that a mixture of oleic acid and erucic acid, known as "Lorenzo's Oil," administered to boys with X-ALD prior to symptom onset can prevent or delay the appearance of the childhood cerebral form It is not known whether Lorenzo's Oil will have any beneficial effects in AMN. Furthermore, Lorenzo's Oil has no beneficial effect in symptomatic boys with X-ALD. Bone marrow transplantations can provide long-term benefit to boys who have early evidence of the childhood cerebral form of X-ALD, but the procedure carries risk of mortality and morbidity and is not recommended for those whose symptoms are already severe or who have the adult-onset or neonatal forms.
Prognosis for patients with childhood cerebral X-ALD is generally poor due to progressive neurological deterioration unless bone marrow transplantation is performed early. Death usually occurs within 1 to 10 years after the onset of symptoms. Adult-onset AMN will progress over decades.
The prevalence of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy is 1 in 20,000 to 50,000 individuals worldwide. This condition occurs with a similar frequency in all populations.
Mutations in the ABCD1 gene cause X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy. The ABCD1 gene provides instructions for producing the adrenoleukodystrophy protein (ALDP), which is involved in transporting certain fat molecules called very long-chain fatty acids (VLCFAs) into peroxisomes. Peroxisomes are small sacs within cells that process many types of molecules, including VLCFAs.  ABCD1 gene mutations result in a shortage (deficiency) of ALDP. When this protein is lacking, the transport and subsequent breakdown of VLCFAs is disrupted, causing abnormally high levels of these fats in the body. The accumulation of VLCFAs may be toxic to the adrenal cortex and myelin. Research suggests that the accumulation of VLCFAs triggers an inflammatory response in the brain, which could lead to the breakdown of myelin. The destruction of these tissues leads to the signs and symptoms of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy.
X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy is inherited in an X-linked pattern. A condition is considered X-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes in each cell. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the ABCD1 gene in each cell is sufficient to cause X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy. Because females have two copies of the X chromosome, one altered copy of the ABCD1 gene in each cell usually does not cause any features of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy; however, some females with one altered copy of the gene have health problems associated with this disorder. The signs and symptoms of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy tend to appear at a later age in females than in males. Affected women usually develop features of the adrenomyeloneuropathy type.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: X-Linked Adrenoleukodystrophy  - Genetic Testing Registry: Adrenoleukodystrophy  - Genomics Education Programme (UK)  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Adrenoleukodystrophy  - National Marrow Donor Program  - X-linked Adrenoleukodystrophy Database: Diagnosis of X-ALD   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care