Polyglucosan body disease affects the nervous system. Individuals with this condition usually begin to show signs of the disorder after the age of 40. Signs and symptoms include trouble walking due to decreased sensation in the legs (peripheral neuropathy) and muscle weakness and stiffness (spasticity). Individuals may also have trouble controlling bladder function as a result of damage to the nerves of the bladder (neurogenic bladder). Approximately half of the individuals with adult polyglucosan body disease also experience some degree of intellectual impairment. Mutations in the GBE1 gene can cause adult polyglucosan body disease. In some cases, no mutation can be found and the cause of the disease is not known. Adult polyglucosan body disease is thought to be inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment usually involves a team of specialists who can address the specific symptoms such as walking difficulties, incontinence, and intellectual impairment.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Polyglucosan body disease, adult. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal pyramidal signs 90% Abnormal renal physiology 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Erectile abnormalities 90% Gait disturbance 90% Hemiplegia/hemiparesis 90% Hypertonia 90% Muscle weakness 90% Peripheral neuropathy 90% Behavioral abnormality 50% Skin ulcer 50% Abnormality of extrapyramidal motor function 7.5% Developmental regression 7.5% EMG abnormality 7.5% Incoordination 7.5% Limitation of joint mobility 7.5% Abnormal upper motor neuron morphology - Abnormality of metabolism/homeostasis - Adult onset - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Distal sensory impairment - Paresthesia - Slow progression - Tetraparesis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Adult polyglucosan body disease is a condition that affects the nervous system. People with this condition have problems walking due to reduced sensation in their legs (peripheral neuropathy) and progressive muscle weakness and stiffness (spasticity). Damage to the nerves that control bladder function, a condition called neurogenic bladder, causes affected individuals to have progressive difficulty controlling the flow of urine. About half of people with adult polyglucosan body disease experience a decline in intellectual function (dementia).  People with adult polyglucosan body disease typically first experience signs and symptoms related to the condition between ages 30 and 60.
Adult polyglucosan body disease is a rare condition; although its exact prevalence is unknown, at least 50 affected individuals have been described in the medical literature.
Mutations in the GBE1 gene cause adult polyglucosan body disease. The GBE1 gene provides instructions for making the glycogen branching enzyme. This enzyme is involved in the production of a complex sugar called glycogen, which is a major source of stored energy in the body. Most GBE1 gene mutations result in a shortage (deficiency) of the glycogen branching enzyme, which leads to the production of abnormal glycogen molecules. These abnormal glycogen molecules, called polyglucosan bodies, accumulate within cells and cause damage. Nerve cells (neurons) appear to be particularly vulnerable to the accumulation of polyglucosan bodies in people with this disorder, leading to impaired neuronal function.  Some mutations in the GBE1 gene that cause adult polyglucosan body disease do not result in a shortage of glycogen branching enzyme. In people with these mutations, the activity of this enzyme is normal. How mutations cause the disease in these individuals is unclear. Other people with adult polyglucosan body disease do not have identified mutations in the GBE1 gene. In these individuals, the cause of the disease is unknown.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of adult polyglucosan body disease:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Adult Polyglucosan Body Disease  - Genetic Testing Registry: Polyglucosan body disease, adult  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Neurogenic Bladder  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Spasticity   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care