Afibrinogenemia, sometimes called congenital afibrinogenemia, is an inherited blood disorder in which the blood does not clot normally. It occurs when there is a lack (deficiency) of a protein called fibrinogen (or factor I), which is needed for the blood to clot. Affected individuals may be susceptible to severe bleeding (hemorrhaging) episodes, particularly during infancy and childhood. Afibrinogenemia is thought to be transmitted as an autosomal recessive trait.
 In afibrinogenemia, with fibrinogen levels less than 0.1 g/L, bleeding manifestations range from mild to severe. Umbilical cord hemorrhage frequently provides an early alert to the abnormality. Other bleeding manifestations include the following: Epistaxis (nosebleeds) and oral mucosal bleeding Hemarthrosis (joint bleeding) and muscle hematoma (bruising) Gastrointestinal bleeding Menorrhagia and postpartum hemorrhage Traumatic and surgical bleeding Spontaneous splenic rupture and intracranial hemorrhage (rare) Miscarriage The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Afibrinogenemia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the menstrual cycle 90% Epistaxis 90% Gastrointestinal hemorrhage 90% Gingival bleeding 90% Joint swelling 90% Spontaneous abortion 90% Intracranial hemorrhage 7.5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Hypofibrinogenemia - Splenic rupture - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Afibrinogenemia is caused by a severe lack of fibrinogen (coagulation factor I), a protein in the blood that is essential in the blood clotting (coagulation) process. This defect in fibrinogen synthesis can result from mutations in one or another of the fibrinogen genes alpha (FGA), beta (FGB) or gamma (FGG).
 Afibrinogenemia is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner, meaning that in order to be affected, an individual must have inherited two abnormal genes, one from each parent. The offspring of an individual with afibrinogenemia are obligate heterozygotes (carriers) for a disease-causing mutation in one of the fibrinogen genes. In order to be affected, these children would also have to inherit a mutated gene from their other parent.
 There is no known prevention or cure for afibrinogenemia. To treat bleeding episodes or to prepare for surgery to treat other conditions, patients may receive: The liquid portion of the blood (plasma) A blood product containing concentrated fibrinogen (cryoprecipitate) through a vein (transfusion) Prophylactic therapy should also be considered for patients with recurrent bleeding episodes, CNS hemorrhage, or during pregnancy for women with recurrent miscarriage. Individuals with afibrinogenemia should consider the following as part of their management plan: Consultation with a hematologist/hemostasis specialist, particularly for patients who require fibrinogen replacement therapy. Genetic counseling and family studies, especially for individuals with extensive family history or those considering pregnancy. Follow-up by a comprehensive bleeding disorder care team experienced in diagnosing and managing inherited bleeding disorders. Vaccination with the hepatitis B vaccine because transfusion increases the risk of hepatitis.
Congenital afibrinogenemia is a bleeding disorder caused by impairment of the blood clotting process. Normally, blood clots protect the body after an injury by sealing off damaged blood vessels and preventing further blood loss. However, bleeding is uncontrolled in people with congenital afibrinogenemia. Newborns with this condition often experience prolonged bleeding from the umbilical cord stump after birth. Nosebleeds (epistaxis) and bleeding from the gums or tongue are common and can occur after minor trauma or in the absence of injury (spontaneous bleeding). Some affected individuals experience bleeding into the spaces between joints (hemarthrosis) or the muscles (hematoma). Rarely, bleeding in the brain or other internal organs occurs, which can be fatal. Women with congenital afibrinogenemia can have abnormally heavy menstrual bleeding (menorrhagia). Without proper treatment, women with this disorder may have difficulty carrying a pregnancy to term, resulting in repeated miscarriages.
Congenital afibrinogenemia is a rare condition that occurs in approximately 1 in 1 million newborns.
Congenital afibrinogenemia results from mutations in one of three genes, FGA, FGB, or FGG. Each of these genes provides instructions for making one part (subunit) of a protein called fibrinogen. This protein is important for blood clot formation (coagulation), which is needed to stop excessive bleeding after injury. In response to injury, fibrinogen is converted to fibrin, the main protein in blood clots. Fibrin proteins attach to each other, forming a stable network that makes up the blood clot.  Congenital afibrinogenemia is caused by a complete absence of fibrinogen protein. Most FGA, FGB, and FGG gene mutations that cause this condition result in a premature stop signal in the instructions for making the respective protein. If any protein is made, it is nonfunctional. When any one subunit is missing, the fibrinogen protein is not assembled, which results in the absence of fibrin. Consequently, blood clots do not form in response to injury, leading to the excessive bleeding seen in people with congenital afibrinogenemia.
Congenital afibrinogenemia is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene. The parents have about half the normal level of fibrinogen in their blood but typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of congenital afibrinogenemia:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary factor I deficiency disease   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care