Alagille syndrome is an inherited disorder in which a person has fewer than the normal number of small bile ducts inside the liver. It is a complex disorder that can affect other parts of the body including the heart, kidneys, blood vessels, eyes, face, and skeleton. Symptoms, including jaundice, pale, loose stools, and poor growth, typically develop in the first 2 years of life. Symptoms and symptom severity varies, even among people in the same family. Alagille syndrome is caused by mutations in the JAG1 and NOTCH2 genes. It is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive. In severe cases, liver transplant may be necessary.
The estimated prevalence of Alagille syndrome is 1 in 70,000 newborns. This figure is based on diagnoses of liver disease in infants, and may be an underestimation because some people with Alagille syndrome do not develop liver disease during infancy.
In more than 90 percent of cases, mutations in the JAG1 gene cause Alagille syndrome. Another 7 percent of individuals with Alagille syndrome have small deletions of genetic material on chromosome 20 that include the JAG1 gene. A few people with Alagille syndrome have mutations in a different gene, called NOTCH2. The JAG1 and NOTCH2 genes provide instructions for making proteins that fit together to trigger interactions called Notch signaling between neighboring cells during embryonic development. This signaling influences how the cells are used to build body structures in the developing embryo. Changes in either the JAG1 gene or NOTCH2 gene probably disrupt the Notch signaling pathway. As a result, errors may occur during development, especially affecting the bile ducts, heart, spinal column, and certain facial features.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered or deleted gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  In approximately 30 to 50 percent of cases, an affected person inherits the mutation or deletion from one affected parent. Other cases result from new mutations in the gene or new deletions of genetic material on chromosome 20 that occur as random events during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) or in early fetal development. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Alagille syndrome:  - Boston Children's Hospital  - Children's Hospital of Philadelphia  - Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Alagille Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Alagille syndrome 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Arteriohepatic dysplasia  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Tetralogy of Fallot   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Alagille syndrome is a genetic condition that results in various symptoms in different parts of the body, including the liver. A person with Alagille syndrome has fewer than the normal number of small bile ducts inside the liver. The liver is the organ in the abdomenthe area between the chest and hipsthat makes blood proteins and bile, stores energy and nutrients, fights infection, and removes harmful chemicals from the blood.
                
Bile ducts are tubes that carry bile from the liver cells to the gallbladder for storage and to the small intestine for use in digestion. Bile is fluid made by the liver that carries toxins and waste products out of the body and helps the body digest fats and the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K. In people with Alagille syndrome, the decreased number of bile ducts causes bile to build up in the liver, a condition also called cholestasis, leading to liver damage and liver disease.
Alagille syndrome is caused by a gene mutation, or defect. Genes provide instructions for making proteins in the body. A gene mutation is a permanent change in the DNA sequence that makes up a gene. DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, is the material inside cells that carries genetic information and passes genes from parent to child. Approximately 30 to 50 percent of people with Alagille syndrome have an inherited gene mutation, meaning it has been passed on by a parent. In the remaining cases, the gene mutation develops spontaneously.1 In spontaneous cases, neither parent carries a copy of the mutated gene.
                
Most cases of Alagille syndrome are caused by a mutation in the JAGGED1 (JAG1) gene. In less than 1 percent of cases, a mutation in the NOTCH2 gene is the cause.2
                

                
Genetic Disorders   Each cell contains thousands of genes that provide the instructions for making proteins for growth and repair of the body. If a gene has a mutation, the protein made by that gene may not function properly, which sometimes creates a genetic disorder. Not all gene mutations cause a disorder.   People have two copies of most genes; one copy is inherited from each parent. A genetic disorder occurs when one or both parents pass a mutated gene to a child at conception. A genetic disorder can also occur through a spontaneous gene mutation, meaning neither parent carries a copy of the mutated gene. Once a spontaneous gene mutation has occurred in a person, it can be passed to the person's children.   Read more about genes and genetic conditions at the U.S. National Library of Medicine's (NLM's) Genetics Home Reference at www.ghr.nlm.nih.gov.
Alagille syndrome occurs in about one of every 30,000 live births.3 The disorder affects both sexes equally and shows no geographical, racial, or ethnic preferences.
                
JAG1 and NOTCH2 gene mutations are inherited in an autosomal dominant way, which means a child can get Alagille syndrome by inheriting either of the gene mutations from only one parent. Each child of a parent with an autosomal dominant mutation has a 50 percent chance of inheriting the mutated gene.
                
The following chart shows the chance of inheriting an autosomal dominant gene mutation:
                
The gene mutations that cause Alagille syndrome may cause mild or subtle symptoms. Some people may not know they are affected, while others with the gene mutation may develop more serious characteristics of Alagille syndrome. A person with a gene mutation, whether showing serious symptoms or not, has Alagille syndrome and can pass the gene mutation to a child.
                
Read more about how genetic conditions are inherited at the NLM's Genetics Home Reference website at www.ghr.nlm.nih.gov.
Scientists have not yet found a way to prevent Alagille syndrome. However, complications of the disorder can be managed with the help of health care providers. Routine visits with a health care team are needed to prevent complications from becoming worse.
Researchers have not found that eating, diet, and nutrition play a role in causing or preventing Alagille syndrome. However, these factors are important for people with Alagille syndrome, particularly children, who are malnourished, growing poorly, or have delayed puberty. Caregivers and parents of children with Alagille syndrome should try to maximize their children's potential for growth through good eating, diet, and nutrition.
                
A nutritionist or a dietitiana person with training in nutrition and dietcan work with someone with Alagille syndrome and his or her health care team to build an appropriate healthy eating plan. A person with Alagille syndrome may need to take dietary supplements or vitamins in addition to eating a set number of calories, based on the type of complications the person has. Researchers consider good nutrition to be one of the most important aspects of managing the disorder.
                
If potential liver problems are present, a person with Alagille syndrome should not drink alcoholic beverages without talking with his or her health care provider first.
                
Additionally, eating, diet, and nutrition play a part in overall health and preventing further health problems.