Food allergy is an abnormal response to a food triggered by your body's immune system.    In adults, the foods that most often trigger allergic reactions include fish, shellfish, peanuts, and tree nuts, such as walnuts. Problem foods for children can include eggs, milk, peanuts, tree nuts, soy, and wheat.    The allergic reaction may be mild. In rare cases it can cause a severe reaction called anaphylaxis. Symptoms of food allergy include       - Itching or swelling in your mouth    - Vomiting, diarrhea, or abdominal cramps and pain    - Hives or eczema    - Tightening of the throat and trouble breathing    - Drop in blood pressure       Your health care provider may use a detailed history, elimination diet, and skin and blood tests to diagnose a food allergy.    When you have food allergies, you must be prepared to treat an accidental exposure. Wear a medical alert bracelet or necklace, and carry an auto-injector device containing epinephrine (adrenaline).    You can only prevent the symptoms of food allergy by avoiding the food. After you and your health care provider have identified the foods to which you are sensitive, you must remove them from your diet.    NIH: National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases
An allergy is a reaction by your immune system to something that does not bother most other people. People who have allergies often are sensitive to more than one thing. Substances that often cause reactions are       - Pollen    - Dust mites    - Mold spores    - Pet dander    - Food    - Insect stings    - Medicines       Normally, your immune system fights germs. It is your body's defense system. In most allergic reactions, however, it is responding to a false alarm. Genes and the environment probably both play a role.    Allergies can cause a variety of symptoms such as a runny nose, sneezing, itching, rashes, swelling, or asthma. Allergies can range from minor to severe. Anaphylaxis is a severe reaction that can be life-threatening. Doctors use skin and blood tests to diagnose allergies. Treatments include medicines, allergy shots, and avoiding the substances that cause the reactions.    NIH: National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases
Latex is a milky fluid that comes from the tropical rubber tree. Hundreds of everyday products contain latex. Repeated exposure to a protein in natural latex can make you more likely to develop a latex allergy. If your immune system detects the protein, a reaction can start in minutes. You could get a rash or asthma. In rare cases you could have a severe reaction called anaphylaxis.    Your doctor may use a physical exam and skin and blood tests to diagnose it. There are medicines to treat a reaction, but it is best to try to avoid latex. Common latex products include       - Gloves    - Condoms    - Balloons    - Rubber bands    - Shoe soles    - Pacifiers       You can find latex-free versions of these products.