Alternating hemiplegia is a rare neurological disorder that develops in childhood, most often before the child is 18 months old. The disorder is characterized by recurrent episodes of paralysis that involve one or both sides of the body, multiple limbs, or a single limb. The paralysis may affect different parts of the body at different times and may be brief or last for several days. Oftentimes these episodes will resolve after sleep. Affected children may also have abnormal movements involving stiffening or "dance-like" movements of a limb, as well as walking and balance problems. Some children have seizures. Children may have normal or delayed development. There are both benign and more serious forms of the disorder. Most children do not have a family history of the disorder; however, recent studies have show that some children with a family history have mutations in the genes CACNA1A, SCN1A, and ATP1A2. Mutations in the ATP1A2 gene have previously been associated with families affect by familial hemiplegic migraine.
Drug therapy including verapamil may help to reduce the severity and duration of attacks of paralysis associated with the more serious form of alternating hemiplegia
Children with the benign form of alternating hemiplegia have a good prognosis. Those who experience the more severe form have a poor prognosis because intellectual and mental capacities do not respond to drug therapy, and balance and gait problems continue. Over time, walking unassisted becomes difficult or impossible.
The NINDS supports research on paralytic disorders such as alternating hemiplegia, with the goals of learning more about these disorders and finding ways to prevent, treat and, ultimately cure them.
Alternating hemiplegia of childhood is a neurological condition characterized by recurrent episodes of temporary paralysis, often affecting one side of the body (hemiplegia). During some episodes, the paralysis alternates from one side of the body to the other or affects both sides at the same time. These episodes begin in infancy or early childhood, usually before 18 months of age, and the paralysis lasts from minutes to days.  In addition to paralysis, affected individuals can have sudden attacks of uncontrollable muscle activity; these can cause involuntary limb movements (choreoathetosis), muscle tensing (dystonia), movement of the eyes (nystagmus), or shortness of breath (dyspnea). People with alternating hemiplegia of childhood may also experience sudden redness and warmth (flushing) or unusual paleness (pallor) of the skin. These attacks can occur during or separately from episodes of hemiplegia.  The episodes of hemiplegia or uncontrolled movements can be triggered by certain factors, such as stress, extreme tiredness, cold temperatures, or bathing, although the trigger is not always known. A characteristic feature of alternating hemiplegia of childhood is that all symptoms disappear while the affected person is sleeping but can reappear shortly after awakening. The number and length of the episodes initially worsen throughout childhood but then begin to decrease over time. The uncontrollable muscle movements may disappear entirely, but the episodes of hemiplegia occur throughout life.  Alternating hemiplegia of childhood also causes mild to severe cognitive problems. Almost all affected individuals have some level of developmental delay and intellectual disability. Their cognitive functioning typically declines over time.
Alternating hemiplegia of childhood is a rare condition that affects approximately 1 in 1 million people.
Alternating hemiplegia of childhood is primarily caused by mutations in the ATP1A3 gene. Very rarely, a mutation in the ATP1A2 gene is involved in the condition. These genes provide instructions for making very similar proteins. They function as different forms of one piece, the alpha subunit, of a larger protein complex called Na+/K+ ATPase; the two versions of the complex are found in different parts of the brain. Both versions play a critical role in the normal function of nerve cells (neurons). Na+/K+ ATPase transports charged atoms (ions) into and out of neurons, which is an essential part of the signaling process that controls muscle movement.  Mutations in the ATP1A3 or ATP1A2 gene reduce the activity of the Na+/K+ ATPase, impairing its ability to transport ions normally. It is unclear how a malfunctioning Na+/K+ ATPase causes the episodes of paralysis or uncontrollable movements characteristic of alternating hemiplegia of childhood.
Alternating hemiplegia of childhood is considered an autosomal dominant condition, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Most cases of alternating hemiplegia of childhood result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. However, the condition can also run in families. For unknown reasons, the signs and symptoms are typically milder when the condition is found in multiple family members than when a single individual is affected.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of alternating hemiplegia of childhood:  - The Great Ormond Street Hospital  - University of Utah School of Medicine   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care