Late-onset familial Alzheimer disease is a form of familial Alzheimer disease that begins after age 65. In general, Alzheimer disease (AD) is a degenerative disease of the brain that causes gradual loss of memory, judgement and the ability to function socially. The exact underlying cause of late-onset familial AD is not completely understood; however, researchers suspect that it is a complex condition, which is likely associated with multiple susceptibility genes (such as the APOE e4 allele) in combination with environmental and lifestyle factors. Although complex conditions do tend to cluster in families, they do not follow a clear-cut pattern of inheritance. There is no cure for AD. Treatment is supportive and based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
Alzheimer disease (AD) is a degenerative disease of the brain that causes gradual loss of memory, judgment, and the ability to function socially. Alzheimer disease currently affects about 5 million people. About 75 percent of Alzheimer disease cases are classified as sporadic, which means they occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Although the cause of these cases is unknown, genetic changes are likely to play a role. Virtually all sporadic cases of Alzheimer disease begin after age 65, and the risk of developing this condition increases as a person gets older. AD can be subdivided into two groups based on the age of onset: (1) Early-onset (1%-6% of the cases) which start in people younger than 60- 65 years of age (2) Late-onset, which starts in people older than 65 years old. In about 25% of cases, AD is familial (2 or more people in a family have AD). For more information, please visit GARD's familial Alzheimer disease Web page.
Early-onset, autosomal dominant Alzheimer disease is a form of Alzheimer disease (AD) that develops before the age of 65. In general, AD is a degenerative disease of the brain that causes gradual loss of memory, judgement, and the ability to function socially. The early-onset, autosomal dominant form of AD is caused by changes (mutations) one of three different genes: APP, PSEN1, and PSEN2. The condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. There is no cure for AD. Treatment is supportive and based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
How  Early-onset, autosomal dominant Alzheimer disease is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that to be affected, a person only needs a change (mutation) in one copy of the responsible gene in each cell. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from an affected parent. Other cases may result from new (de novo) mutations in the gene. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. A person with this condition has a 50% chance with each pregnancy of passing along the altered gene to his or her child.
Alzheimer disease currently affects an estimated 2.4 million to 4.5 million Americans. Because the risk of developing Alzheimer disease increases with age and more people are living longer, the number of people with this disease is expected to increase significantly in coming decades.
Most cases of early-onset Alzheimer disease are caused by gene mutations that can be passed from parent to child. Researchers have found that this form of the disorder can result from mutations in one of three genes: APP, PSEN1, or PSEN2. When any of these genes is altered, large amounts of a toxic protein fragment called amyloid beta peptide are produced in the brain. This peptide can build up in the brain to form clumps called amyloid plaques, which are characteristic of Alzheimer disease. A buildup of toxic amyloid beta peptide and amyloid plaques may lead to the death of nerve cells and the progressive signs and symptoms of this disorder.  Some evidence indicates that people with Down syndrome have an increased risk of developing Alzheimer disease. Down syndrome, a condition characterized by intellectual disability and other health problems, occurs when a person is born with an extra copy of chromosome 21 in each cell. As a result, people with Down syndrome have three copies of many genes in each cell, including the APP gene, instead of the usual two copies. Although the connection between Down syndrome and Alzheimer disease is unclear, the production of excess amyloid beta peptide in cells may account for the increased risk. People with Down syndrome account for less than 1 percent of all cases of Alzheimer disease.  The causes of late-onset Alzheimer disease are less clear. The late-onset form does not clearly run in families, although clusters of cases have been reported in some families. This disorder is probably related to variations in one or more genes in combination with lifestyle and environmental factors. A gene called APOE has been studied extensively as a risk factor for the disease. In particular, a variant of this gene called the e4 allele seems to increase an individual's risk for developing late-onset Alzheimer disease. Researchers are investigating many additional genes that may play a role in Alzheimer disease risk.
The early-onset form of Alzheimer disease is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person inherits the altered gene from one affected parent.  The inheritance pattern of late-onset Alzheimer disease is uncertain. People who inherit one copy of the APOE e4 allele have an increased chance of developing the disease; those who inherit two copies of the allele are at even greater risk. It is important to note that people with the APOE e4 allele inherit an increased risk of developing Alzheimer disease, not the disease itself. Not all people with Alzheimer disease have the e4 allele, and not all people who have the e4 allele will develop the disease.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Alzheimer disease:  - Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Washington University School of Medicine  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Alzheimer Disease Overview  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Early-Onset Familial Alzheimer Disease  - Genetic Testing Registry: Alzheimer disease 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Alzheimer disease, type 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Alzheimer disease, type 4  - Genetic Testing Registry: Alzheimer's disease  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Alzheimer's Disease  - Michigan Alzheimer's Disease Research Center  - University of California Davis Alzheimer's Disease Center   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care