Alzheimers disease is a brain disease that slowly destroys memory and thinking skills and, eventually, the ability to carry out the simplest tasks. It begins slowly and gets worse over time. Currently, it has no cure. Alzheimers disease is the most common cause of dementia in older people.  Get more details about Alzheimer's disease.
Scientists do not yet fully understand what causes Alzheimer's disease in most people. In early-onset Alzheimers, which occurs in people between the ages of 30 and 60, a genetic mutation is usually the cause. Late-onset Alzheimers, which usually develops after age 60, arises from a complex series of brain changes that occur over decades. The causes probably include a mix of genetic, environmental, and lifestyle factors. These factors affect each person differently. Learn more about the genetics of Alzheimers disease.  Increasing age is the most important known risk factor for Alzheimer's disease. Lifestyle factors, such as diet and physical exercise, and long-term health conditions, like high blood pressure and diabetes, might also play a role in the risk of developing Alzheimers disease.
The only definitive way to diagnose Alzheimer's disease is to find out whether plaques and tangles exist in brain tissue. To look at brain tissue, doctors perform a brain autopsy, an examination of the brain done after a person dies. Doctors can only make a diagnosis of "possible" or probable Alzheimers disease while a person is alive. Doctors with special training can diagnose Alzheimer's disease correctly up to 90 percent of the time. Doctors who can diagnose Alzheimers include geriatricians, geriatric psychiatrists, and neurologists. A geriatrician specializes in the treatment of older adults. A geriatric psychiatrist specializes in mental problems in older adults. A neurologist specializes in brain and nervous system disorders. To diagnose Alzheimer's disease, doctors may - ask questions about overall health, past medical problems, ability to carry out daily activities, and changes in behavior and personality  - conduct tests to measure memory, problem solving, attention, counting, and language skills   - carry out standard medical tests, such as blood and urine tests  - perform brain scans to look for anything in the brain that does not look normal. ask questions about overall health, past medical problems, ability to carry out daily activities, and changes in behavior and personality conduct tests to measure memory, problem solving, attention, counting, and language skills carry out standard medical tests, such as blood and urine tests perform brain scans to look for anything in the brain that does not look normal.
Currently, no treatment can stop Alzheimer's disease. However, four medications are used to treat its symptoms. These medicines may help maintain thinking, memory, and speaking skills for a limited time. They work by regulating certain chemicals in the brain. Most of these medicines work best for people in the early or middle stages of the disease. For people with mild or moderate Alzheimer's, donepezil (Aricept), rivastigmine (Exelon), or galantamine (Razadyne) may help. Donepezil is also approved to treat symptoms of moderate to severe Alzheimer's. Another drug, memantine (Namenda), is used to treat symptoms of moderate to severe Alzheimer's, although it also has limited effects. All of these medicines have possible side effects. Learn how Alzheimers medications work, how to take them, and where to find more information. Certain medicines and other approaches can help control the behavioral symptoms of Alzheimer's disease. These symptoms include sleeplessness, agitation, wandering, anxiety, anger, and depression. See more about medications used to treat behavioral symptoms. Some medicines must be used with caution.
Currently, no medicines or treatments are known to prevent Alzheimer's disease, but scientists are studying many possibilities. These possibilities include lifestyle factors such as exercise and physical activity, a healthy diet, and mentally stimulating activities. In addition to lifestyle factors, scientists have found clues that some long-term health conditions, like heart disease, high blood pressure, and diabetes, are related to Alzheimer's disease. Its possible that controlling these conditions will reduce the risk of developing Alzheimers.
Alzheimers disease is an illness of the brain. It causes large numbers of nerve cells in the brain to die. This affects a persons ability to remember things and think clearly. People with Alzheimers become forgetful and easily confused and may have a hard time concentrating. They may have trouble taking care of themselves and doing basic things like making meals, bathing, and getting dressed. Alzheimers varies from person to person. It can progress faster in some people than in others, and not everyone will have the same symptoms. In general, though, Alzheimers takes many years to develop, becoming increasingly severe over time. As the disease gets worse, people need more help. Eventually, they require total care. For a short overview of Alzheimers, see  Understanding Alzheimers Disease: What You Need to Know.
Currently, no medication can cure Alzheimers disease, but four medicines are approved to treat the symptoms of the disease. - Aricept (donezepil)for all stages of Alzheimers  - Exelon (rivastigmine)for mild to moderate Alzheimers  - Razadyne (galantamine)--for mild to moderate Alzheimers  - Namenda (memantine)for moderate to severe Alzheimers  -  Namzarec (memantine and donepezil)for moderate to severe Alzheimers Aricept (donezepil)for all stages of Alzheimers Exelon (rivastigmine)for mild to moderate Alzheimers Razadyne (galantamine)--for mild to moderate Alzheimers Namenda (memantine)for moderate to severe Alzheimers Namzarec (memantine and donepezil)for moderate to severe Alzheimers These medications can help slow down memory loss and allow people with Alzheimers to be more comfortable and independent for a longer time. If appropriate, the persons doctor may prescribe a medicine to treat behavior problems such as anxiety, depression, and aggression. Medicines to treat these behavior problems should be used only after other strategies have been tried. Talk with the doctor about which medicines are safest and most effective.
When you learn that someone has Alzheimers disease, you may wonder when and how to tell your family and friends. You may be worried about how others will react to or treat the person. Others often sense that something is wrong before they are told. Alzheimers disease is hard to keep secret. When the time seems right, be honest with family, friends, and others. Use this as a chance to educate them about Alzheimers disease. You can share information to help them understand what you and the person with Alzheimers are going through. You can also tell them what they can do to help. Get more information about helping family and friends understand Alzheimer's disease.
As Alzheimers disease gets worse, you will need more help to care for the person. It's okay to seek help whenever you need it. Several kinds of help are available. - Home health care agencies send a home health aide or nurse to your home to help you care for a person with Alzheimers. They may come for a few hours or stay for 24 hours and are paid by the hour.  Home health care agencies send a home health aide or nurse to your home to help you care for a person with Alzheimers. They may come for a few hours or stay for 24 hours and are paid by the hour. - Meal services bring hot meals to the person's home or your home. The delivery staff does not feed the person. Some groups do not charge for their services. Others may charge a small fee. Meal services bring hot meals to the person's home or your home. The delivery staff does not feed the person. Some groups do not charge for their services. Others may charge a small fee. - Adult day care services provide a safe environment, activities, and staff who take care of the person with Alzheimers at their own facility. Many programs provide transportation between the persons home and the facility.  Watch a video to see what services adult day care provides. Adult day care services provide a safe environment, activities, and staff who take care of the person with Alzheimers at their own facility. Many programs provide transportation between the persons home and the facility.  Watch a video to see what services adult day care provides. - Geriatric care managers visit your home to assess your needs and suggest and arrange home-care services. They charge by the hour. Most insurance plans don't cover these costs.  Geriatric care managers visit your home to assess your needs and suggest and arrange home-care services. They charge by the hour. Most insurance plans don't cover these costs.
In very few families, people develop AD in their 30s, 40s, and 50s. This is known as "early onset" AD. These individuals have a mutation in one of three different inherited genes that causes the disease to begin at an earlier age. More than 90 percent of AD develops in people older than 65. This form of AD is called "late-onset" AD, and its development and pattern of damage in the brain is similar to that of early-onset AD. The course of this disease varies from person to person, as does the rate of decline. In most people with AD, symptoms first appear after age 65.
                
We don't yet completely understand the causes of late-onset AD, but they probably include genetic, environmental, and lifestyle factors. Although the risk of developing AD increases with age, AD and dementia symptoms are not a part of normal aging. There are also some forms of dementia that aren't related to brain diseases such as AD, but are caused by systemic abnormalities such as metabolic syndrome, in which the combination of high blood pressure, high cholesterol, and diabetes causes confusion and memory loss.