Amyloidosis occurs when abnormal proteins called amyloids build up and form deposits. The deposits can collect in organs such as the kidney and heart. This can cause the organs to become stiff and unable to work the way they should.     There are three main types of amyloidosis:       - Primary - with no known cause    - Secondary - caused by another disease, including some types of cancer    - Familial - passed down through genes       Symptoms can vary, depending upon which organs are affected. Treatment depends on the type of amyloidosis you have. The goal is to help with symptoms and limit the production of proteins. If another disease is the cause, it needs to be treated.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Amyloidosis corneal. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Blurred vision - Childhood onset - Corneal dystrophy - Photophobia - Reduced visual acuity - Visual impairment - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Yes. GeneTests lists the names of laboratories that are performing genetic testing for lattice corneal dystrophy. Most of the laboratories listed through GeneTests do not accept direct contact from patients and their families; therefore, if you are interested in learning more, you will need to work with a health care provider or a genetics professional. To view the contact information for the clinical laboratories, conducting testing for lattice dystrophy type 1 and 3a click here. To access the contact information for the research laboratories performing genetic testing for lattice dystrophy type 3 click here.
Amyloidosis is a rare disease that occurs when amyloid proteins are deposited in tissues and organs. Amyloid proteins are abnormal proteins that the body cannot break down and recycle, as it does with normal proteins. When amyloid proteins clump together, they form amyloid deposits. The buildup of these deposits damages a persons organs and tissues. Amyloidosis can affect different organs and tissues in different people and can affect more than one organ at the same time. Amyloidosis most frequently affects the kidneys, heart, nervous system, liver, and digestive tract. The symptoms and severity of amyloidosis depend on the organs and tissues affected.
The most common sign of primary amyloidosis of the kidneys is nephrotic syndromea collection of signs that indicate kidney damage. The signs of nephrotic syndrome include
                
- albuminuriaan increased amount of albumin, a protein, in the urine. A person with nephrotic syndrome excretes more than half a teaspoon of albumin per day.  - hyperlipidemiaa condition in which a persons blood has more-than-normal amounts of fats and cholesterol.  - edemaswelling, typically in a persons legs, feet, or ankles and less often in the hands or face.  - hypoalbuminemiaa condition in which a persons blood has less-than-normal amounts of albumin.
                
More information is provided in the NIDDK health topic, Nephrotic Syndrome in Adults.
                
Other signs and symptoms of primary amyloidosis may include
                
- fatigue, or feeling tired  - shortness of breath  - low blood pressure  - numbness, tingling, or a burning sensation in the hands or feet  - weight loss
A health care provider diagnoses dialysis-related amyloidosis with
                
- urinalysis  - blood tests  - imaging tests
                
A health care provider can use urinalysis and blood tests to detect the amount of amyloid proteins in urine and blood. Imaging tests, such as x-rays and CT scans, can provide pictures of bone cysts and amyloid deposits in bones, joints, tendons, and ligaments. An x-ray technician performs imaging tests in a health care providers office, an outpatient center, or a hospital. A radiologista doctor who specializes in medical imaginginterprets the images. A patient does not require anesthesia.
A health care provider treats primary amyloidosis of the kidneys with the following:
                
- medication therapy, including chemotherapy  - a stem cell transplant  - treating other conditions
                
Medication therapy. The goal of medication therapy, including chemotherapy, is to reduce amyloid protein levels in the blood. Many health care providers recommend combination medication therapy such as
                
- melphalan (Alkeran), a type of chemotherapy  - dexamethasone (Decadron), an anti-inflammatory steroid medication
                
These medications can stop the growth of the cells that make amyloid proteins. These medications may cause hair loss and serious side effects, such as nausea, vomiting, and fatigue.
                
Stem cell transplant. A stem cell transplant is a procedure that replaces a patients damaged stem cells with healthy ones. Stem cells are found in the bone marrow and develop into three types of blood cells the body needs. To prepare for a stem cell transplant, the patient receives high doses of chemotherapy. The actual transplant is like a blood transfusion. The transplanted stem cells travel to the bone marrow to make healthy new blood cells. The chemotherapy a patient receives to prepare for the transplant can have serious side effects, so it is important to talk with the health care provider about the risks of this procedure.
                
Read more in What Is a Blood and Marrow Stem Cell Transplant? at www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/health-topics/topics/bmsct.
                
Treating other conditions. Primary amyloidosis has no cure, so treating some of the side effects and other conditions seen with the disease is essential. Other conditions may include
                
- anemiatreatment may include medications  - depressiontreatment may include talking with a mental health counselor and taking medications  - fatiguetreatment may include changes in diet and activity level  - kidney diseasetreatment may include medications to help maintain kidney function or slow the progression of kidney disease
                
A patient and his or her family should talk with the health care provider about resources for support and treatment options.
                
More information about kidney disease is provided in the NIDDK health topic, niddk-kidney disease.
Researchers have not found that eating, diet, and nutrition play a role in causing or preventing primary amyloidosis of the kidneys or dialysis-related amyloidosis. People with nephrotic syndrome may make dietary changes such as
                
- limiting dietary sodium, often from salt, to help reduce edema and lower blood pressure  - decreasing liquid intake to help reduce edema and lower blood pressure  - eating a diet low in saturated fat and cholesterol to help control more-than-normal amounts of fats and cholesterol in the blood
                
Health care providers may recommend that people with kidney disease eat moderate or reduced amounts of protein. Proteins break down into waste products that the kidneys filter from the blood. Eating more protein than the body needs may burden the kidneys and cause kidney function to decline faster. However, protein intake that is too low may lead to malnutrition, a condition that occurs when the body does not get enough nutrients.
                
People with kidney disease on a restricted protein diet should receive blood tests that can show low nutrient levels. People with primary amyloidosis of the kidneys or dialysis-related amyloidosis should talk with a health care provider about dietary restrictions to best manage their individual needs.