Andersen-Tawil syndrome is a type of long QT syndrome and is also considered a rare form of periodic paralysis. It causes episodes of muscle weakness, changes in heart rhythm (arrhythmia), and developmental abnormalities. Physical abnormalities associated with this condition typically affect the head, face, and limbs. About 60% of cases of Andersen-Tawil syndrome are caused by mutations in the KCNJ2 gene. The cause of the remaining cases remains unknown. This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.
 Yes, the Genetic Testing Registry (GTR) provides information about the genetic tests for this condition. The intended audience for the GTR is health care providers and researchers. Patients and consumers with specific questions about a genetic test should contact a health care provider or a genetics professional.  How is Andersen-Tawil syndrome diagnosed? The diagnosis of Andersen-Tawil syndrome might be suspected in individuals with either: 1. Two of the following three criteria: Periodic paralysis Symptomatic cardiac arrhythmias or evidence of enlarged U-waves, ventricular ectopy, or a prolonged QTc or QUc interval on electrocardiogram (ECG)  Characteristic facial features, dental abnormalities, small hands and feet, and at least two of the following: Low-set ears Widely spaced eyes Small lower jaw (mandible) Fifth-digit clinodactyly (curved pinky finger) Syndactyly or 2. One of the above three criteria in addition to at least one other family member who meets two of the three criteria. The presence of a mutation in the KCNJ2 gene confirms the diagnosis of Andersen-Tawil syndrome.
Andersen-Tawil syndrome is a rare genetic disorder; its incidence is unknown. About 100 people with this condition have been reported worldwide.
Mutations in the KCNJ2 gene cause Andersen-Tawil syndrome.  The KCNJ2 gene provides instructions for making a protein that forms a channel across cell membranes. This channel transports positively charged atoms (ions) of potassium into muscle cells. The movement of potassium ions through these channels is critical for maintaining the normal functions of muscles used for movement (skeletal muscles) and cardiac muscle. Mutations in the KCNJ2 gene alter the usual structure and function of potassium channels or prevent the channels from being inserted correctly into the cell membrane. Many mutations prevent a molecule called PIP2 from binding to the channels and effectively regulating their activity. These changes disrupt the flow of potassium ions in skeletal and cardiac muscle, leading to the periodic paralysis and irregular heart rhythm characteristic of Andersen-Tawil syndrome.  Researchers have not determined the role of the KCNJ2 gene in bone development, and it is not known how mutations in the gene lead to the developmental abnormalities often found in Andersen-Tawil syndrome.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In some cases, a person with Andersen-Tawil syndrome inherits the mutation from one affected parent. Other cases result from new mutations in the KCNJ2 gene. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Andersen-Tawil syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Andersen-Tawil Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Andersen Tawil syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care