If you have anemia, your blood does not carry enough oxygen to the rest of your body. The most common cause of anemia is not having enough iron. Your body needs iron to make hemoglobin. Hemoglobin is an iron-rich protein that gives the red color to blood. It carries oxygen from the lungs to the rest of the body.    Anemia has three main causes: blood loss, lack of red blood cell production, and high rates of red blood cell destruction.    Conditions that may lead to anemia include       - Heavy periods    - Pregnancy    - Ulcers    - Colon polyps or colon cancer    - Inherited disorders    - A diet that does not have enough iron, folic acid or vitamin B12    - Blood disorders such as sickle cell anemia and thalassemia, or cancer    - Aplastic anemia, a condition that can be inherited or acquired    - G6PD deficiency, a metabolic disorder       Anemia can make you feel tired, cold, dizzy, and irritable. You may be short of breath or have a headache.    Your doctor will diagnose anemia with a physical exam and blood tests. Treatment depends on the kind of anemia you have.    NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
Anemia is a common condition. It occurs in all age, racial, and ethnic groups. Both men and women can have anemia. However, women of childbearing age are at higher risk for the condition because of blood loss from menstruation.
                
Anemia can develop during pregnancy due to low levels of iron and folic acid (folate) and changes in the blood. During the first 6 months of pregnancy, the fluid portion of a woman's blood (the plasma) increases faster than the number of red blood cells. This dilutes the blood and can lead to anemia.
                
During the first year of life, some babies are at risk for anemia because of iron deficiency. At-risk infants include those who are born too early and infants who are fed breast milk only or formula that isn't fortified with iron. These infants can develop iron deficiency by 6 months of age.
                
Infants between 1 and 2 years of age also are at risk for anemia. They may not get enough iron in their diets, especially if they drink a lot of cow's milk. Cow's milk is low in the iron needed for growth.
                
Drinking too much cow's milk may keep an infant or toddler from eating enough iron-rich foods or absorbing enough iron from foods.
                
Older adults also are at increased risk for anemia. Researchers continue to study how the condition affects older adults. Many of these people have other medical conditions as well.
                
Major Risk Factors
                
Factors that raise your risk for anemia include:
                
A diet that is low in iron, vitamins, or minerals
                
Blood loss from surgery or an injury
                
Long-term or serious illnesses, such as kidney disease, cancer, diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, HIV/AIDS, inflammatory bowel disease (including Crohn's disease), liver disease, heart failure, and thyroid disease
                
Long-term infections
                
A family history of inherited anemia, such as sickle cell anemia or thalassemia
The most common symptom of anemia is fatigue (feeling tired or weak). If you have anemia, you may find it hard to find the energy to do normal activities.
                
Other signs and symptoms of anemia include:
                
Shortness of breath
                
Dizziness
                
Headache
                
Coldness in the hands and feet
                
Pale skin
                
Chest pain
                
These signs and symptoms can occur because your heart has to work harder to pump oxygen-rich blood through your body.
                
Mild to moderate anemia may cause very mild symptoms or none at all.
                
Complications of Anemia
                
Some people who have anemia may have arrhythmias (ah-RITH-me-ahs). Arrhythmias are problems with the rate or rhythm of the heartbeat. Over time, arrhythmias can damage your heart and possibly lead to heart failure.
                
Anemia also can damage other organs in your body because your blood can't get enough oxygen to them.
                
Anemia can weaken people who have cancer or HIV/AIDS. This can make their treatments not work as well.
                
Anemia also can cause many other health problems. People who have kidney disease and anemia are more likely to have heart problems. With some types of anemia, too little fluid intake or too much loss of fluid in the blood and body can occur. Severe loss of fluid can be life threatening.
You might be able to prevent repeat episodes of some types of anemia, especially those caused by lack of iron or vitamins. Dietary changes or supplements can prevent these types of anemia from occurring again.
                
Treating anemia's underlying cause may prevent the condition (or prevent repeat episodes). For example, if medicine is causing your anemia, your doctor may prescribe another type of medicine.
                
To prevent anemia from getting worse, tell your doctor about all of your signs and symptoms. Talk with your doctor about the tests you may need and follow your treatment plan.
                
You can't prevent some types of inherited anemia, such as sickle cell anemia. If you have an inherited anemia, talk with your doctor about treatment and ongoing care.