A brain aneurysm is an abnormal bulge or "ballooning" in the wall of an artery in the brain. They are sometimes called berry aneurysms because they are often the size of a small berry. Most brain aneurysms produce no symptoms until they become large, begin to leak blood, or burst.    If a brain aneurysm presses on nerves in your brain, it can cause signs and symptoms. These can include       - A droopy eyelid     - Double vision or other changes in vision     - Pain above or behind the eye     - A dilated pupil     - Numbness or weakness on one side of the face or body        Treatment depends on the size and location of the aneurysm, whether it is infected, and whether it has burst. If a brain aneurysm bursts, symptoms can include a sudden, severe headache, nausea and vomiting, stiff neck, loss of consciousness, and signs of a stroke. Any of these symptoms requires immediate medical attention.    NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
An aneurysm (AN-u-rism) is a balloon-like bulge in an artery. Arteries are blood vessels that carry oxygen-rich blood to your body.
                
Arteries have thick walls to withstand normal blood pressure. However, certain medical problems, genetic conditions, and trauma can damage or injure artery walls. The force of blood pushing against the weakened or injured walls can cause an aneurysm.
                
An aneurysm can grow large and rupture (burst) or dissect. A rupture causes dangerous bleeding inside the body. A dissection is a split in one or more layers of the artery wall. The split causes bleeding into and along the layers of the artery wall.
                
Both rupture and dissection often are fatal.
                
Overview
                
Most aneurysms occur in the aorta, the main artery that carries oxygen-rich blood from the heart to the body. The aorta goes through the chest and abdomen.
                
An aneurysm that occurs in the chest portion of the aorta is called a thoracic (tho-RAS-ik) aortic aneurysm. An aneurysm that occurs in the abdominal portion of the aorta is called an abdominal aortic aneurysm.
                
Aneurysms also can occur in other arteries, but these types of aneurysm are less common. This article focuses on aortic aneurysms.
                
About 13,000 Americans die each year from aortic aneurysms. Most of the deaths result from rupture or dissection.
                
Early diagnosis and treatment can help prevent rupture and dissection. However, aneurysms can develop and grow large before causing any symptoms. Thus, people who are at high risk for aneurysms can benefit from early, routine screening.
                
Outlook
                
Doctors often can successfully treat aortic aneurysms with medicines or surgery if theyre found in time. Medicines may be given to lower blood pressure, relax blood vessels, and reduce the risk of rupture.
                
Large aortic aneurysms often can be repaired with surgery. During surgery, the weak or damaged portion of the aorta is replaced or reinforced.
The force of blood pushing against the walls of an artery combined with damage or injury to the arterys walls can cause an aneurysm.
                
Many conditions and factors can damage and weaken the walls of the aorta and cause aortic aneurysms. Examples include aging, smoking, high blood pressure, and atherosclerosis (ath-er-o-skler-O-sis). Atherosclerosis is the hardening and narrowing of the arteries due to the buildup of a waxy substance called plaque (plak).
                
Rarely, infectionssuch as untreated syphilis (a sexually transmitted infection)can cause aortic aneurysms. Aortic aneurysms also can occur as a result of diseases that inflame the blood vessels, such as vasculitis (vas-kyu-LI-tis).
                
A family history of aneurysms also may play a role in causing aortic aneurysms.
                
In addition to the factors above, certain genetic conditions may cause thoracic aortic aneurysms (TAAs). Examples of these conditions include Marfan syndrome, Loeys-Dietz syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (the vascular type), and Turner syndrome.
                
These genetic conditions can weaken the bodys connective tissues and damage the aorta. People who have these conditions tend to develop aneurysms at a younger age than other people. Theyre also at higher risk for rupture and dissection.
                
Trauma, such as a car accident, also can damage the walls of the aorta and lead to TAAs.
                
Researchers continue to look for other causes of aortic aneurysms. For example, theyre looking for genetic mutations (changes in the genes) that may contribute to or cause aneurysms.
Certain factors put you at higher risk for an aortic aneurysm. These factors include:
                
Male gender. Men are more likely than women to have aortic aneurysms.
                
Age. The risk for abdominal aortic aneurysms increases as you get older. These aneurysms are more likely to occur in people who are aged 65 or older.
                
Smoking. Smoking can damage and weaken the walls of the aorta.
                
A family history of aortic aneurysms. People who have family histories of aortic aneurysms are at higher risk for the condition, and they may have aneurysms before the age of 65.
                
A history of aneurysms in the arteries of the legs.
                
Certain diseases and conditions that weaken the walls of the aorta. Examples include high blood pressure and atherosclerosis.
                
Having a bicuspid aortic valve can raise the risk of having a thoracic aortic aneurysm. A bicuspid aortic valve has two leaflets instead of the typical three.
                
Car accidents or trauma also can injure the arteries and increase the risk for aneurysms.
                
If you have any of these risk factors, talk with your doctor about whether you need screening for aneurysms.
The signs and symptoms of an aortic aneurysm depend on the type and location of the aneurysm. Signs and symptoms also depend on whether the aneurysm has ruptured (burst) or is affecting other parts of the body.
                
Aneurysms can develop and grow for years without causing any signs or symptoms. They often don't cause signs or symptoms until they rupture, grow large enough to press on nearby body parts, or block blood flow.
                
Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms
                
Most abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAAs) develop slowly over years. They often don't cause signs or symptoms unless they rupture. If you have an AAA, your doctor may feel a throbbing mass while checking your abdomen.
                
When symptoms are present, they can include:
                
A throbbing feeling in the abdomen
                
Deep pain in your back or the side of your abdomen
                
Steady, gnawing pain in your abdomen that lasts for hours or days
                
If an AAA ruptures, symptoms may include sudden, severe pain in your lower abdomen and back; nausea (feeling sick to your stomach) and vomiting; constipation and problems with urination; clammy, sweaty skin; light-headedness; and a rapid heart rate when standing up.
                
Internal bleeding from a ruptured AAA can send you into shock. Shock is a life-threatening condition in which blood pressure drops so low that the brain, kidneys, and other vital organs can't get enough blood to work well. Shock can be fatal if its not treated right away.
                
Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms
                
A thoracic aortic aneurysm (TAA) may not cause symptoms until it dissects or grows large. If you have symptoms, they may include:
                
Pain in your jaw, neck, back, or chest
                
Coughing and/or hoarseness
                
Shortness of breath and/or trouble breathing or swallowing
                
A dissection is a split in one or more layers of the artery wall. The split causes bleeding into and along the layers of the artery wall.
                
If a TAA ruptures or dissects, you may feel sudden, severe, sharp or stabbing pain starting in your upper back and moving down into your abdomen. You may have pain in your chest and arms, and you can quickly go into shock.
                
If you have any symptoms of TAA or aortic dissection, call 911. If left untreated, these conditions may lead to organ damage or death.
The best way to prevent an aortic aneurysm is to avoid the factors that put you at higher risk for one. You cant control all aortic aneurysm risk factors, but lifestyle changes can help you lower some risks.
                
For example, if you smoke, try to quit. Talk with your doctor about programs and products that can help you quit smoking. Also, try to avoid secondhand smoke. For more information about how to quit smoking, go to the Diseases and Conditions Index (DCI) Smoking and Your Heart article.
                
Another important lifestyle change is following a healthy diet. A healthy diet includes a variety of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains. It also includes lean meats, poultry, fish, beans, and fat-free or low-fat milk or milk products. A healthy diet is low in saturated fat, trans fat, cholesterol, sodium (salt), and added sugar.
                
For more information about following a healthy diet, go to the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institutes (NHLBIs) Aim for a Healthy Weight Web site, "Your Guide to a Healthy Heart," and "Your Guide to Lowering Your Blood Pressure With DASH." All of these resources include general information about healthy eating.
                
Be as physically active as you can. Talk with your doctor about the amounts and types of physical activity that are safe for you. For more information about physical activity, go to the DCI Physical Activity and Your Heart article and the NHLBIs "Your Guide to Physical Activity and Your Heart."
                
Work with your doctor to control medical conditions such as high blood pressure and high blood cholesterol. Follow your treatment plans and take all of your medicines as your doctor prescribes.
                
Screening for Aneurysms
                
Although you may not be able to prevent an aneurysm, early diagnosis and treatment can help prevent rupture and dissection.
                
Aneurysms can develop and grow large before causing any signs or symptoms. Thus, people who are at high risk for aneurysms may benefit from early, routine screening.
                
Your doctor may recommend routine screening if youre:
                
A man between the ages of 65 and 75 who has ever smoked
                
A man or woman between the ages of 65 and 75 who has a family history of aneurysms
                
If youre at risk, but not in one of these high-risk groups, ask your doctor whether screening will benefit you.