An aneurysm is a bulge or "ballooning" in the wall of an artery. Arteries are blood vessels that carry oxygen-rich blood from the heart to other parts of the body. If an aneurysm grows large, it can burst and cause dangerous bleeding or even death.    Most aneurysms are in the aorta, the main artery that runs from the heart through the chest and abdomen.    There are two types of aortic aneurysm:       - Thoracic aortic aneurysms - these occur in the part of the aorta running through the chest    - Abdominal aortic aneurysms - these occur in the part of the aorta running through the abdomen       Most aneurysms are found during tests done for other reasons. Some people are at high risk for aneurysms. It is important for them to get screening, because aneurysms can develop and become large before causing any symptoms Screening is recommended for people between the ages of 65 and 75 if they have a family history, or if they are men who have smoked. Doctors use imaging tests to find aneurysms. Medicines and surgery are the two main treatments.    NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
Abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAAs) are aneurysms that occur in the part of the aorta that passes through the abdomen. They may occur at any age, but are most common in men between 50 and 80 years of age. Many people with an AAA have no symptoms, but some people have a pulsing sensation in the abdomen and/or pain in the back. If the aneurysm ruptures, it may cause deep, severe pain; nausea; vomiting; fast heart rate; clammy skin; and/or shock. About 20% of AAAs eventually rupture and are often fatal. The condition has multiple genetic and environmental risk factors, and may sometimes occur as part of an inherited syndrome. When more than one family member is affected, it may be considered "familial abdominal aortic aneurysm." Treatment depends on the size of the aneurysm and may include blood pressure medications, or surgery to repair the aneurysm.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Abdominal aortic aneurysm. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abdominal aortic aneurysm - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is thought to be a multifactorial condition, meaning that one or more genes likely interact with environmental factors to cause the condition. In some cases, it may occur as part of an inherited syndrome. Having a family history of AAA increases the risk of developing the condition. A genetic predisposition has been suspected since the first report of three brothers who had a ruptured AAA, and additional families with multiple affected relatives have been reported. In some cases, it may be referred to as " familial abdominal aortic aneurysm." A Swedish survey reported that the relative risk of developing AAA for a first-degree relative of a person with AAA was approximately double that of a person with no family history of AAA. In another study, having a family history increased the risk of having an aneurysm 4.3-fold. The highest risk was among brothers older than age 60, in whom the prevalence was 18%. While specific variations in DNA (polymorphisms) are known or suspected to increase the risk for AAA, no one gene is known to cause isolated AAA. It can occur with some inherited disorders that are caused by mutations in a single gene, such as Marfan syndrome and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, vascular type. However, these more typically involve the thoracoabdominal aorta. Because the inheritance of AAA is complex, it is not possible to predict whether a specific person will develop AAA. People interested in learning more about the genetics of AAA, and how their family history affects risks to specific family members, should speak with a genetics professional.
Familial TAAD is believed to account for at least 20 percent of thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections. In the remainder of cases, the abnormalities are thought to be caused by factors that are not inherited, such as damage to the walls of the aorta from aging, tobacco use, injury, or disease.  While aortic aneurysms are common worldwide, it is difficult to determine their exact prevalence because they usually cause no symptoms unless they rupture. Ruptured aortic aneurysms and dissections are estimated to cause almost 30,000 deaths in the United States each year.
Mutations in any of several genes are associated with familial TAAD. Mutations in the ACTA2 gene have been identified in 14 to 20 percent of people with this disorder, and TGFBR2 gene mutations have been found in 2.5 percent of affected individuals. Mutations in several other genes account for smaller percentages of cases.  The ACTA2 gene provides instructions for making a protein called smooth muscle alpha ()-2 actin, which is found in vascular smooth muscle cells. Layers of these cells are found in the walls of the aorta and other arteries. Within vascular smooth muscle cells, smooth muscle -2 actin forms the core of structures called sarcomeres, which are necessary for muscles to contract. This ability to contract allows the arteries to maintain their shape instead of stretching out as blood is pumped through them.  ACTA2 gene mutations that are associated with familial TAAD change single protein building blocks (amino acids) in the smooth muscle -2 actin protein. These changes likely affect the way the protein functions in smooth muscle contraction, interfering with the sarcomeres' ability to prevent the arteries from stretching. The aorta, where the force of blood pumped directly from the heart is most intense, is particularly vulnerable to this stretching. Abnormal stretching of the aorta results in the aortic dilatation, aneurysms, and dissections that characterize familial TAAD.  TGFBR2 gene mutations are also associated with familial TAAD. The TGFBR2 gene provides instructions for making a protein called transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-) receptor type 2. This receptor transmits signals from the cell surface into the cell through a process called signal transduction. Through this type of signaling, the environment outside the cell affects activities inside the cell. In particular, the TGF- receptor type 2 protein helps control the growth and division (proliferation) of cells and the process by which cells mature to carry out specific functions (differentiation). It is also involved in the formation of the extracellular matrix, an intricate lattice of proteins and other molecules that forms in the spaces between cells.  TGFBR2 gene mutations alter the receptor's structure, which disturbs signal transduction. The disturbed signaling can impair cell growth and development. It is not known how these changes result in the specific aortic abnormalities associated with familial TAAD.  Mutations in other genes, some of which have not been identified, are also associated with familial TAAD.
Familial TAAD is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of an altered gene in each cell can be sufficient to cause the condition. In most cases, an affected person has one affected parent. However, some people who inherit an altered gene never develop the aortic abnormalities associated with the condition; this situation is known as reduced penetrance.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of familial TAAD:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms and Aortic Dissections  - Genetic Testing Registry: Aortic aneurysm, familial thoracic 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Aortic aneurysm, familial thoracic 4  - Genetic Testing Registry: Aortic aneurysm, familial thoracic 6  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital aneurysm of ascending aorta  - Genetic Testing Registry: Thoracic aortic aneurysm and aortic dissection   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care