Angina is chest pain or discomfort you feel when there is not enough blood flow to your heart muscle. Your heart muscle needs the oxygen that the blood carries. Angina may feel like pressure or a squeezing pain in your chest. It may feel like indigestion. You may also feel pain in your shoulders, arms, neck, jaw, or back.     Angina is a symptom of coronary artery disease (CAD), the most common heart disease. CAD happens when a sticky substance called plaque builds up in the arteries that supply blood to the heart, reducing blood flow.    There are three types of angina:       - Stable angina is the most common type. It happens when the heart is working harder than usual. Stable angina has a regular pattern. Rest and medicines usually help.    - Unstable angina is the most dangerous. It does not follow a pattern and can happen without physical exertion. It does not go away with rest or medicine. It is a sign that you could have a heart attack soon.    - Variant angina is rare. It happens when you are resting. Medicines can help.       Not all chest pain or discomfort is angina. If you have chest pain, you should see your health care provider.    NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
Prinzmetal's variant angina is characterized by recurrent episodes of chest pain that occur while an individual is at rest. This condition is a form of unstable angina because the episodes do not occur in a predictable pattern. Prinzmetal's variant angina may occur spontaneously, or it may be caused by exposure to cold, emotional stress, alcohol withdrawal, or vasoconstricting medications. The symptoms of this condition usually respond to treatment. Individuals with Prinzmetals' variant angina may have a higher risk for heart attack or arrhythmia.
 The main symptom of Prinzmetal's variant angina is chest pain (angina) with the following characteristics: Occurs under the chest bone Described as squeezing, constricting, tightness, pressure, crushing Is usually severe and may radiate to the neck, jaw, shoulder, or arm Often occurs at rest Typically occurs at the same time each day, usually between midnight and 8am. Duration of pain is 5 to 30 minutes Pain is relieved by nitroglycerin Loss of consciousness
 Prinzmetal's variant angina is caused by coronary artery spasms. A coronary artery spasm is a temporary, abrupt, and focal (restricted to one location) contraction of the muscles in the wall of an artery in the heart. This spasm constricts the artery, slowing or stoping blood flow. A prolonged spasm can cause chest pain, or even a heart attack (myocardial infarction).
 The goal of treatment is to control chest pain and to prevent heart attack. Nitroglycerin or other nitrate medications may be prescribed to relieve chest pain. Calcium-channel blockers may be chronically needed. These medications widen the blood vessels to improve blood and oxygen flow. Medications may also include beta-blockers; however, in some individuals, beta-blockers may be harmful.
Angina is a symptom of an underlying heart problem. Its usually a symptom of coronary heart disease (CHD), but it also can be a symptom of coronary microvascular disease (MVD). So, if youre at risk for CHD or coronary MVD, youre also at risk for angina.
                
The major risk factors for CHD and coronary MVD include:
                
Unhealthy cholesterol levels.
                
High blood pressure.
                
Smoking.
                
Insulin resistance or diabetes.
                
Overweight or obesity.
                
Metabolic syndrome.
                
Lack of physical activity.
                
Unhealthy diet.
                
Older age. (The risk increases for men after 45 years of age and for women after 55 years of age.)
                
Family history of early heart disease.
                
For more detailed information about CHD and coronary MVD risk factors, visit the Diseases and Conditions Index Coronary Heart Disease, Coronary Heart Disease Risk Factors, and Coronary Microvascular Disease articles.
                
People sometimes think that because men have more heart attacks than women, men also suffer from angina more often. In fact, overall, angina occurs equally among men and women.
                
Microvascular angina, however, occurs more often in women. About 70 percent of the cases of microvascular angina occur in women around the time of menopause.
                
Unstable angina occurs more often in older adults. Variant angina is rare; it accounts for only about 2 out of 100 cases of angina. People who have variant angina often are younger than those who have other forms of angina.
Pain and discomfort are the main symptoms of angina. Angina often is described as pressure, squeezing, burning, or tightness in the chest. The pain or discomfort usually starts behind the breastbone.
                
Pain from angina also can occur in the arms, shoulders, neck, jaw, throat, or back. The pain may feel like indigestion. Some people say that angina pain is hard to describe or that they can't tell exactly where the pain is coming from.
                
Signs and symptoms such as nausea (feeling sick to your stomach), fatigue (tiredness), shortness of breath, sweating, light-headedness, and weakness also may occur.
                
Women are more likely to feel discomfort in the neck, jaw, throat, abdomen, or back. Shortness of breath is more common in older people and those who have diabetes. Weakness, dizziness, and confusion can mask the signs and symptoms of angina in elderly people.
                
Symptoms also vary based on the type of angina you have.
                
Because angina has so many possible symptoms and causes, all chest pain should be checked by a doctor. Chest pain that lasts longer than a few minutes and isn't relieved by rest or angina medicine may be a sign of a heart attack. Call 911 right away.
                
Stable Angina
                
The pain or discomfort:
                
Occurs when the heart must work harder, usually during physical exertion
                
Doesn't come as a surprise, and episodes of pain tend to be alike
                
Usually lasts a short time (5 minutes or less)
                
Is relieved by rest or medicine
                
May feel like gas or indigestion
                
May feel like chest pain that spreads to the arms, back, or other areas
                
Unstable Angina
                
The pain or discomfort:
                
Often occurs at rest, while sleeping at night, or with little physical exertion
                
Comes as a surprise
                
Is more severe and lasts longer than stable angina (as long as 30 minutes)
                
Usually isnt relieved by rest or medicine
                
May get worse over time
                
May mean that a heart attack will happen soon
                
Variant Angina
                
The pain or discomfort:
                
Usually occurs at rest and during the night or early morning hours
                
Tends to be severe
                
Is relieved by medicine
                
Microvascular Angina
                
The pain or discomfort:
                
May be more severe and last longer than other types of angina pain
                
May occur with shortness of breath, sleep problems, fatigue, and lack of energy
                
Often is first noticed during routine daily activities and times of mental stress
You can prevent or lower your risk for angina and heart disease by making lifestyle changes and treating related conditions.
                
Making Lifestyle Changes
                
Healthy lifestyle choices can help prevent or delay angina and heart disease. To adopt a healthy lifestyle, you can:
                
Quit smoking and avoid secondhand smoke
                
Avoid angina triggers
                
Follow a healthy diet
                
Be physically active
                
Maintain a healthy weight
                
Learn ways to handle stress and relax
                
Take your medicines as your doctor prescribes
                
For more information about these lifestyle changes, go to How Is Angina Treated? For more information about preventing and controlling heart disease risk factors, visit the Diseases and Conditions Index Coronary Heart Disease, Coronary Heart Disease Risk Factors, and Coronary Microvascular Disease articles.
                
Treating Related Conditions
                
You also can help prevent or delay angina and heart disease by treating related conditions, such as high blood cholesterol, high blood pressure, diabetes, and overweight or obesity.
                
If you have one or more of these conditions, talk with your doctor about how to control them. Follow your treatment plan and take all of your medicines as your doctor prescribes.