References National LIbrary of Medicine. Aniridia. Genetics Home Reference. June 2009; http://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/condition/aniridia. Accessed 3/30/2011. Hingorani M, Moore A. Aniridia. GeneReviews. August 12, 2008; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1360/. Accessed 3/30/2011.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Aniridia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the macula 90% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the iris 90% Nystagmus 90% Visual impairment 90% Blepharophimosis 50% Cataract 50% Corneal erosion 50% Ectopia lentis 50% Glaucoma 50% Keratoconjunctivitis sicca 50% Opacification of the corneal stroma 50% Optic atrophy 50% Photophobia 50% Ptosis 50% Strabismus 50% Abnormality of the genital system 7.5% Abnormality of the hypothalamus-pituitary axis 7.5% Abnormality of the sense of smell 7.5% Abnormality of the teeth 7.5% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the corpus callosum 7.5% Cognitive impairment 7.5% Decreased corneal thickness 7.5% Microcornea 7.5% Ocular albinism 7.5% Optic nerve coloboma 7.5% Sensorineural hearing impairment 7.5% Umbilical hernia 7.5% Aniridia - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Hypoplasia of the fovea - Optic nerve hypoplasia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 In childhood, treatment for aniridia focuses on regular eye examinations including necessary corrective lenses, tinted lenses to reduce light sensitivity, and occlusion therapy to address vision abnormalities. Children with Wilms tumor-aniridia-genital anomalies-retardation (WAGR) syndrome require regular renal ultrasounds, hearing tests and evaluation by a pediatric oncologist.  Additional treatment is adapted to each individual depending on the associated complications.
Aniridia is an eye disorder characterized by a complete or partial absence of the colored part of the eye (the iris). These iris abnormalities may cause the pupils to be abnormal or misshapen. Aniridia can cause reduction in the sharpness of vision (visual acuity) and increased sensitivity to light (photophobia).  People with aniridia can also have other eye problems. Increased pressure in the eye (glaucoma) typically appears in late childhood or early adolescence. Clouding of the lens of the eye (cataracts), occur in 50 percent to 85 percent of people with aniridia. In about 10 percent of affected people, the structures that carry information from the eyes to the brain (optic nerves) are underdeveloped. Individuals with aniridia may also have involuntary eye movements (nystagmus) or underdevelopment of the region at the back of the eye responsible for sharp central vision (foveal hypoplasia). Many of these eye problems contribute to progressive vision loss in affected individuals. The severity of symptoms is typically the same in both eyes.  Rarely, people with aniridia have behavioral problems, developmental delay, and problems detecting odors.
Aniridia occurs in 1 in 50,000 to 100,000 newborns worldwide.
Aniridia is caused by mutations in the PAX6 gene. The PAX6 gene provides instructions for making a protein that is involved in the early development of the eyes, brain and spinal cord (central nervous system), and the pancreas. Within the brain, the PAX6 protein is involved in the development of a specialized group of brain cells that process smell (the olfactory bulb). The PAX6 protein attaches (binds) to specific regions of DNA and regulates the activity of other genes. On the basis of this role, the PAX6 protein is called a transcription factor. Following birth, the PAX6 protein regulates several genes that likely contribute to the maintenance of different eye structures.  Mutations in the PAX6 gene result in the production of a nonfunctional PAX6 protein that is unable to bind to DNA and regulate the activity of other genes. A lack of functional PAX6 protein disrupts the formation of the eyes during embryonic development.
Aniridia is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  In approximately two-thirds of cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. The remaining one-third of cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of aniridia:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Aniridia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital aniridia   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care