 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Ankylosis of teeth. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Reduced number of teeth 90% Abnormality of dental enamel 50% Clinodactyly of the 5th finger 7.5% Mandibular prognathia 7.5% Abnormality of the teeth - Autosomal dominant inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Temporomandibular ankylosis is a condition that occurs when the temporomandibular joint (the joint that connects the jaw to the side of the head) becomes fused by bony or fibrous tissue. As a result, affected people may experience pain, speech impairment, and difficulty chewing and swallowing. It can interfere with nutrition, oral hygiene and the normal growth of the face and/or jaw. Although the condition can be diagnosed in people of all ages, it generally occurs during the first and second decades of life. Temporomandibular ankylosis is most commonly caused by trauma or infection; it may also be associated with certain conditions such as ankylosing spondylitis, rheumatoid arthritis, or psoriasis. The condition is typically treated surgically.