Clinical trials are part of clinical research and at the heart of all treatment advances. Clinical trials look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat disease. The National Institute of Mental Health at NIH supports research studies on mental health and disorders. To learn how clinical trials work, see  Participating in Clinical Trials. To see NIH-funded studies currently recruiting participants in anxiety disorders, visit www.ClinicalTrials.gov  and type in "anxiety disorders." Clinical Trials.gov is the NIH/National Library of Medicine's registry of federally and privately funded clinical trials for all disease. To see personal stories of people who have volunteered for clinical trials, visit  NIH Clinical Trials Research and You.
Studies estimate that anxiety disorders affect around 15 percent of older adults in a given year. More women than men experience anxiety disorders. They tend to be less common among older adults than younger adults. But developing an anxiety disorder late in life is not a normal part of aging.
Anxiety disorders are a collection of disorders that include generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), social phobia, and panic disorder.
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) affects about 6.8 million American adults, including twice as many women as men. The disorder develops gradually and can begin at any point in the life cycle, although the years of highest risk are between childhood and middle age. The average age of onset is 31 years old. Social phobia affects about 15 million American adults. Women and men are equally likely to develop the disorder, which usually begins in childhood or early adolescence. There is some evidence that genetic factors are involved.  Panic disorder  affects about 6 million American adults and is twice as common in women as men. Panic attacks often begin in late adolescence or early adulthood, but not everyone who experiences panic attacks will develop panic disorder. Many people have just one attack and never have another. The tendency to develop panic attacks appears to be inherited.
Most insurance plans, including health maintenance organizations (HMOs), will cover treatment for anxiety disorders. Check with your insurance company and find out. If you dont have insurance, the Health and Human Services division of your county government may offer mental health care at a public mental health center that charges people according to how much they are able to pay. If you are on public assistance, you may be able to get care through your state Medicaid plan. To learn about more mental health resources, see  Help for Mental Illness,  from the National Institute of Mental Health at NIH.
Fear and anxiety are part of life. You may feel anxious before you take a test or walk down a dark street. This kind of anxiety is useful - it can make you more alert or careful. It usually ends soon after you are out of the situation that caused it. But for millions of people in the United States, the anxiety does not go away, and gets worse over time. They may have chest pains or nightmares. They may even be afraid to leave home. These people have anxiety disorders. Types include       - Panic disorder     - Obsessive-compulsive disorder     - Post-traumatic stress disorder     - Phobias     - Generalized anxiety disorder        Treatment can involve medicines, therapy or both.    NIH: National Institute of Mental Health