Apert syndrome is a disorder mainly characterized by craniosynostosis (premature fusion of skull bones, causing abnormalities in the shape of the head and face) and syndactyly (fusion or webbing or fingers and/or toes). Other signs and symptoms may include distinctive facial features (bulging and wide-set eyes; a beaked nose; an underdeveloped upper jaw leading to crowded teeth and other dental problems; and shallow eye sockets which can cause vision problems); polydactyly; hearing loss; hyperhidrosis (increased sweating); and other symptoms. Cognitive abilities in affected individuals range from normal to mild or moderate intellectual disability. It is caused by mutations in the FGFR2 gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Management typically includes various surgical procedures that are tailored to the affected individual's needs.
 Apert syndrome and the other conditions associated with FGFR-related craniosynostosis were clinically defined long before the molecular basis of this group of disorders was discovered. Apert syndrome can be diagnosed primarily based on the following clinical findings: Turribrachycephalic skull shape (cone-shaped or towering skull) which is observable clinically and can be confirmed by skull radiograph or head CT examination; Characteristic facial features including moderate-to-severe underdevelopment of the midface, bulging and wide-set eyes, beaked nose, underdeveloped jaw and shallow eye sockets;  Variable hand and foot findings such as syndactyly of the fingers and toes and polydactyly. While clinical findings are suggestive of Apert syndrome, molecular genetic testing can help to confirm the diagnosis. Fibroblast growth factor receptor type 2 (FGFR2) sequence analysis is highly sensitive for Apert syndrome. More than 98% of cases are caused by a specific mutation in the 7th exon of the gene encoding FGFR2. The remaining cases are due to another specific mutation in or near exon 9 of FGFR2.  GeneTests lists laboratories offering clinical genetic testing for this condition. Clinical genetic tests are ordered to help diagnose a person or family and to aid in decisions regarding medical care or reproductive issues. Talk to your health care provider or a genetic professional to learn more about your testing options.
Apert syndrome affects an estimated 1 in 65,000 to 88,000 newborns.
Mutations in the FGFR2 gene cause Apert syndrome. This gene produces a protein called fibroblast growth factor receptor 2. Among its multiple functions, this protein signals immature cells to become bone cells during embryonic development. A mutation in a specific part of the FGFR2 gene alters the protein and causes prolonged signaling, which can promote the premature fusion of bones in the skull, hands, and feet.
Apert syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Almost all cases of Apert syndrome result from new mutations in the gene, and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Individuals with Apert syndrome, however, can pass along the condition to the next generation.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Apert syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: FGFR-Related Craniosynostosis Syndromes  - Genetic Testing Registry: Acrocephalosyndactyly type I  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Apert syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Webbing of the fingers or toes   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care