Aplastic anemia is a rare but serious blood disorder. If you have it, your bone marrow doesn't make enough new blood cells. Causes include       - Toxic substances, such as pesticides, arsenic, and benzene    - Radiation therapy and chemotherapy for cancer    - Certain medicines    - Infections such as hepatitis, Epstein-Barr virus, or HIV    - Autoimmune disorders    - Certain inherited conditions    - Pregnancy       In many people, the cause is unknown.    Symptoms include fatigue, weakness, dizziness, and shortness of breath. It can cause heart problems such as an irregular heartbeat, an enlarged heart, and heart failure. You may also have frequent infections and bleeding.    Your doctor will diagnose aplastic anemia based on your medical and family histories, a physical exam, and test results. Once your doctor knows the cause and severity of the condition, he or she can create a treatment plan for you. Treatments include blood transfusions, blood and marrow stem cell transplants, and medicines.    NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
Damage to the bone marrow's stem cells causes aplastic anemia. When stem cells are damaged, they don't grow into healthy blood cells.
                
The cause of the damage can be acquired or inherited. "Acquired" means you aren't born with the condition, but you develop it. "Inherited" means your parents passed the gene for the condition on to you.
                
Acquired aplastic anemia is more common, and sometimes it's only temporary. Inherited aplastic anemia is rare.
                
In many people who have aplastic anemia, the cause is unknown. Some research suggests that stem cell damage may occur because the body's immune system attacks its own cells by mistake.
                
Acquired Causes
                
Many diseases, conditions, and factors can cause aplastic anemia, including:
                
Toxins, such as pesticides, arsenic, and benzene.
                
Radiation and chemotherapy (treatments for cancer).
                
Medicines, such as chloramphenicol (an antibiotic rarely used in the United States).
                
Infectious diseases, such as hepatitis, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus (si-to-MEG-ah-lo-VI-rus), parvovirus B19, and HIV.
                
Autoimmune disorders, such as lupus and rheumatoid arthritis.
                
Pregnancy. (Aplastic anemia that occurs during pregnancy often goes away after delivery.)
                
Sometimes, cancer from another part of the body can spread to the bone and cause aplastic anemia.
                
Inherited Causes
                
Certain inherited conditions can damage the stem cells and lead to aplastic anemia. Examples include Fanconi anemia, Shwachman-Diamond syndrome, dyskeratosis (DIS-ker-ah-TO-sis) congenita, and Diamond-Blackfan anemia.
Aplastic anemia is a rare but serious blood disorder. People of all ages can develop aplastic anemia. However, it's most common in adolescents, young adults, and the elderly. Men and women are equally likely to have it.
                
The disorder is two to three times more common in Asian countries.
                
Your risk of aplastic anemia is higher if you:
                
Have been exposed to toxins
                
Have taken certain medicines or had radiation or chemotherapy (treatments for cancer)
                
Have certain infectious diseases, autoimmune disorders, or inherited conditions
                
For more information, go to "What Causes Aplastic Anemia?"
Lower than normal numbers of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets cause most of the signs and symptoms of aplastic anemia.
                
Signs and Symptoms of Low Blood Cell Counts
                

                
Red Blood Cells
                
The most common symptom of a low red blood cell count is fatigue (tiredness). A lack of hemoglobin in the blood causes fatigue. Hemoglobin is an iron-rich protein in red blood cells. It helps carry oxygen to the body.
                
A low red blood cell count also can cause shortness of breath; dizziness, especially when standing up; headaches; coldness in your hands or feet; pale skin; and chest pain.
                
If you don't have enough hemoglobin-carrying red blood cells, your heart has to work harder to move the reduced amount of oxygen in your blood. This can lead to arrhythmias (irregular heartbeats), a heart murmur, an enlarged heart, or even heart failure.
                
White Blood Cells
                
White blood cells help fight infections. Signs and symptoms of a low white blood cell count include fevers, frequent infections that can be severe, and flu-like illnesses that linger.
                
Platelets
                
Platelets stick together to seal small cuts or breaks on blood vessel walls and stop bleeding. People who have low platelet counts tend to bruise and bleed easily, and the bleeding may be hard to stop.
                
Common types of bleeding associated with a low platelet count include nosebleeds, bleeding gums, pinpoint red spots on the skin, and blood in the stool. Women also may have heavy menstrual bleeding.
                
Other Signs and Symptoms
                
Aplastic anemia can cause signs and symptoms that aren't directly related to low blood cell counts. Examples include nausea (feeling sick to your stomach) and skin rashes.
                
Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria
                
Some people who have aplastic anemia have a condition called paroxysmal (par-ok-SIZ-mal) nocturnal hemoglobinuria (HE-mo-glo-bi-NOO-re-ah), or PNH. This is a red blood cell disorder. Most people who have PNH don't have any signs or symptoms.
                
If symptoms do occur, they may include:
                
Shortness of breath
                
Swelling or pain in the abdomen or swelling in the legs caused by blood clots
                
Blood in the urine
                
Headaches
                
Jaundice (a yellowish color of the skin or whites of the eyes)
                
In people who have aplastic anemia and PNH, either condition can develop first.