The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Ataxia with Oculomotor Apraxia Type 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Impaired distal tactile sensation 57% Tremor 57% Strabismus 30% Conjunctival telangiectasia 5% Areflexia 10/10 Cerebellar atrophy 8/8 Distal amyotrophy 10/10 Distal muscle weakness 10/10 Dysarthria 10/10 Dysphagia 10/10 Elevated alpha-fetoprotein 6/6 Gait ataxia 10/10 Impaired proprioception 10/10 Peripheral axonal neuropathy 8/8 Nystagmus 8/10 Pes cavus 12/18 Oculomotor apraxia 10/18 Scoliosis 7/18 Dystonia 5/18 Head tremor 5/19 Chorea 4/18 Hyporeflexia 4/18 Abnormal pyramidal signs - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Decreased motor nerve conduction velocity - Elevated serum creatine phosphokinase - Gaze-evoked nystagmus - Impaired distal vibration sensation - Increased antibody level in blood - Limb ataxia - Polyneuropathy - Pontocerebellar atrophy - Progressive - Progressive gait ataxia - Saccadic smooth pursuit - Variable expressivity - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Apraxia (called "dyspraxia" if mild) is a neurological disorder characterized by loss of the ability to execute or carry out skilled movements and gestures, despite having the desire and the physical ability to perform them. Apraxia results from dysfunction of the cerebral hemispheres of the brain, especially the parietal lobe, and can arise from many diseases or damage to the brain.  There are several kinds of apraxia, which may occur alone or together. The most common is buccofacial or orofacial apraxia, which causes the inability to carry out facial movements on command such as licking lips, whistling, coughing, or winking. Other types of apraxia include limb-kinetic apraxia (the inability to make fine, precise movements with an arm or leg), ideomotor apraxia (the inability to make the proper movement in response to a verbal command), ideational apraxia (the inability to coordinate activities with multiple, sequential movements, such as dressing, eating, and bathing), verbal apraxia (difficulty coordinating mouth and speech movements), constructional apraxia (the inability to copy, draw, or construct simple figures), and oculomotor apraxia (difficulty moving the eyes on command). Apraxia may be accompanied by a language disorder called aphasia. Corticobasal ganglionic degeneration is a disease that causes a variety of types of apraxia, especially in elderly adults.
Generally, treatment for individuals with apraxia includes physical, speech,or occupational therapy. If apraxia is a symptom of another disorder, the underlying disorder should be treated.
The prognosis for individuals with apraxia varies and depends partly on the underlying cause. Some individuals improve significantly while others may show very little improvement.
The NINDS supports research on movement disorders and conditions such as apraxia. The goals of this research are to increase scientific understanding of these disorders, and to find ways to prevent, treat, and cure them.
Ataxia with oculomotor apraxia is a condition characterized by progressive problems with movement. The hallmark of this condition is difficulty coordinating movements (ataxia), which is often the first symptom. Most affected people also have oculomotor apraxia, which makes it difficult to move their eyes side-to-side. People with oculomotor apraxia have to turn their head to see things in their side (peripheral) vision.  There are multiple types of ataxia with oculomotor apraxia. The types are very similar but are caused by mutations in different genes. The two most common types (types 1 and 2) share features, in addition to ataxia and oculomotor apraxia, that include involuntary jerking movements (chorea), muscle twitches (myoclonus), and disturbances in nerve function (neuropathy). In type 1, ataxia beings around age 4; in type 2, ataxia begins around age 15. Chorea and myoclonus tend to disappear gradually in type 1; these movement problems persist throughout life in type 2. Individuals with type 1 often develop wasting (atrophy) in their hands and feet, which further impairs movement. Nearly all individuals with ataxia with oculomotor apraxia develop neuropathy, which leads to absent reflexes and weakness. Neuropathy causes many individuals with this condition to require wheelchair assistance, typically 10 to 15 years after the start of movement problems. Intelligence is usually not affected by this condition, but some people have intellectual disability.  People with ataxia with oculomotor apraxia type 1 tend to have decreased amounts of a protein called albumin, which transports molecules in the blood. This decrease in albumin likely causes an increase in the amount of cholesterol circulating in the bloodstream. Increased cholesterol levels may raise a person's risk of developing heart disease. People with ataxia with oculomotor apraxia type 2 have increased blood cholesterol, but they have normal albumin levels. Individuals with type 2 tend to have high amounts of a protein called alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) in their blood. (An increase in the level of this protein is normally seen in the bloodstream of pregnant women.) Affected individuals may also have high amounts of a protein called creatine phosphokinase (CPK) in their blood. This protein is found mainly in muscle tissue. The effect of abnormally high levels of AFP or CPK in people with ataxia with oculomotor apraxia type 2 is unknown.
Ataxia with oculomotor apraxia is a rare condition. Type 1 is a common form of ataxia in Portugal and Japan. Type 2 is estimated to occur in 1 in 900,000 individuals worldwide.
Mutations in the APTX and SETX genes cause ataxia with oculomotor apraxia types 1 and 2, respectively. These genes provide instructions for making proteins that are involved in DNA repair.  Mutations in the APTX or SETX gene decrease the amount of functional protein that is available to repair damaged DNA, which leads to the accumulation of breaks in DNA. These breaks can be caused by natural and medical radiation or other environmental exposures, and also occur when chromosomes exchange genetic material in preparation for cell division. DNA damage that is not repaired causes the cell to be unstable and can lead to cell death. It is thought that nerve cells in the brain are particularly affected by cell death because these cells do not copy (replicate) themselves to replace cells that have been lost. The part of the brain involved in coordinating movements (the cerebellum) is especially affected. It is thought that the loss of brain cells in the cerebellum causes the movement problems characteristic of ataxia with oculomotor apraxia.  Mutations in other genes are responsible for the rare types of ataxia with oculomotor apraxia.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of ataxia with oculomotor apraxia:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Ataxia with Oculomotor Apraxia Type 1  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Ataxia with Oculomotor Apraxia Type 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Adult onset ataxia with oculomotor apraxia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Ataxia-oculomotor apraxia 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Ataxia-oculomotor apraxia 4  - Genetic Testing Registry: Spinocerebellar ataxia autosomal recessive 1  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Apraxia   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care