ARDS, or acute respiratory distress syndrome, is a lung condition that leads to low oxygen levels in the blood. ARDS can be life threatening because your body's organs need oxygen-rich blood to work well.
                
People who develop ARDS often are very ill with another disease or have major injuries. They might already be in the hospital when they develop ARDS.
                
Overview
                
To understand ARDS, it helps to understand how the lungs work. When you breathe, air passes through your nose and mouth into your windpipe. The air then travels to your lungs' air sacs. These sacs are called alveoli (al-VEE-uhl-eye).
                
Small blood vessels called capillaries (KAP-ih-lare-ees) run through the walls of the air sacs. Oxygen passes from the air sacs into the capillaries and then into the bloodstream. Blood carries the oxygen to all parts of the body, including the body's organs.
                
In ARDS, infections, injuries, or other conditions cause fluid to build up in the air sacs. This prevents the lungs from filling with air and moving enough oxygen into the bloodstream.
                
As a result, the body's organs (such as the kidneys and brain) don't get the oxygen they need. Without oxygen, the organs may not work well or at all.
                
People who develop ARDS often are in the hospital for other serious health problems. Rarely, people who aren't hospitalized have health problems that lead to ARDS, such as severe pneumonia.
                
If you have trouble breathing, call your doctor right away. If you have severe shortness of breath, call 911.
                
Outlook
                
More people are surviving ARDS now than in the past. One likely reason for this is that treatment and care for the condition have improved. Survival rates for ARDS vary depending on age, the underlying cause of ARDS, associated illnesses, and other factors.
                
Some people who survive recover completely. Others may have lasting damage to their lungs and other health problems.
                
Researchers continue to look for new and better ways to treat ARDS.
Many conditions or factors can directly or indirectly injure the lungs and lead to ARDS. Some common ones are:
                
Sepsis. This is a condition in which bacteria infect the bloodstream.
                
Pneumonia. This is an infection in the lungs.
                
Severe bleeding caused by an injury to the body.
                
An injury to the chest or head, like a severe blow.
                
Breathing in harmful fumes or smoke.
                
Inhaling vomited stomach contents from the mouth.
                
It's not clear why some very sick or seriously injured people develop ARDS and others don't. Researchers are trying to find out why ARDS develops and how to prevent it.
People at risk for ARDS have a condition or illness that can directly or indirectly injure their lungs.
                
Direct Lung Injury
                
Conditions that can directly injure the lungs include:
                
Pneumonia. This is an infection in the lungs.
                
Breathing in harmful fumes or smoke.
                
Inhaling vomited stomach contents from the mouth.
                
Using a ventilator. This is a machine that helps people breathe; rarely, it can injure the lungs.
                
Nearly drowning.
                
Indirect Lung Injury
                
Conditions that can indirectly injure the lungs include:
                
Sepsis. This is a condition in which bacteria infect the bloodstream.
                
Severe bleeding caused by an injury to the body or having many blood transfusions.
                
An injury to the chest or head, such as a severe blow.
                
Pancreatitis (PAN-kre-a-TI-tis). This is a condition in which the pancreas becomes irritated or infected. The pancreas is a gland that releases enzymes and hormones.
                
Fat embolism (EM-bo-lizm). This is a condition in which fat blocks an artery. A physical injury, like a broken bone, can lead to a fat embolism.
                
Drug reaction.
The first signs and symptoms of ARDS are feeling like you can't get enough air into your lungs, rapid breathing, and a low blood oxygen level.
                
Other signs and symptoms depend on the cause of ARDS. They may occur before ARDS develops. For example, if pneumonia is causing ARDS, you may have a cough and fever before you feel short of breath.
                
Sometimes people who have ARDS develop signs and symptoms such as low blood pressure, confusion, and extreme tiredness. This may mean that the body's organs, such as the kidneys and heart, aren't getting enough oxygen-rich blood.
                
People who develop ARDS often are in the hospital for other serious health problems. Rarely, people who aren't hospitalized have health problems that lead to ARDS, such as severe pneumonia.
                
If you have trouble breathing, call your doctor right away. If you have severe shortness of breath, call 911.
                
Complications From ARDS
                
If you have ARDS, you can develop other medical problems while in the hospital. The most common problems are: 
                
Infections. Being in the hospital and lying down for a long time can put you at risk for infections, such as pneumonia. Being on a ventilator also puts you at higher risk for infections.
                
A pneumothorax (collapsed lung). This is a condition in which air or gas collects in the space around the lungs. This can cause one or both lungs to collapse. The air pressure from a ventilator can cause this condition.
                
Lung scarring. ARDS causes the lungs to become stiff (scarred). It also makes it hard for the lungs to expand and fill with air. Being on a ventilator also can cause lung scarring.
                
Blood clots. Lying down for long periods can cause blood clots to form in your body. A blood clot that forms in a vein deep in your body is called a deep vein thrombosis. This type of blood clot can break off, travel through the bloodstream to the lungs, and block blood flow. This condition is called pulmonary embolism.