An arrhythmia is a problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat. It means that your heart beats too quickly, too slowly, or with an irregular pattern. When the heart beats faster than normal, it is called tachycardia. When the heart beats too slowly, it is called bradycardia. The most common type of arrhythmia is atrial fibrillation, which causes an irregular and fast heart beat.    Many factors can affect your heart's rhythm, such as having had a heart attack, smoking, congenital heart defects, and stress. Some substances or medicines may also cause arrhythmias.     Symptoms of arrhythmias include       - Fast or slow heart beat    - Skipping beats    - Lightheadedness or dizziness    - Chest pain    - Shortness of breath     - Sweating        Your doctor can run tests to find out if you have an arrhythmia. Treatment to restore a normal heart rhythm may include medicines, an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) or pacemaker, or sometimes surgery.     NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
An arrhythmia can occur if the electrical signals that control the heartbeat are delayed or blocked. This can happen if the special nerve cells that produce electrical signals don't work properly. It also can happen if the electrical signals don't travel normally through the heart.
                
An arrhythmia also can occur if another part of the heart starts to produce electrical signals. This adds to the signals from the special nerve cells and disrupts the normal heartbeat.
                
Smoking, heavy alcohol use, use of some drugs (such as cocaine or amphetamines), use of some prescription or over-the-counter medicines, or too much caffeine or nicotine can lead to arrhythmias in some people.
                
Strong emotional stress or anger can make the heart work harder, raise blood pressure, and release stress hormones. Sometimes these reactions can lead to arrhythmias.
                
A heart attack or other condition that damages the heart's electrical system also can cause arrhythmias. Examples of such conditions include high blood pressure, coronary heart disease, heart failure, an overactive or underactive thyroid gland (too much or too little thyroid hormone produced), and rheumatic heart disease.
                
Congenital (kon-JEN-ih-tal) heart defects can cause some arrhythmias, such as Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. The term "congenital means the defect is present at birth.
                
Sometimes the cause of arrhythmias is unknown.
Arrhythmias are very common in older adults. Atrial fibrillation (a common type of arrhythmia that can cause problems) affects millions of people, and the number is rising.
                
Most serious arrhythmias affect people older than 60. This is because older adults are more likely to have heart disease and other health problems that can lead to arrhythmias.
                
Older adults also tend to be more sensitive to the side effects of medicines, some of which can cause arrhythmias. Some medicines used to treat arrhythmias can even cause arrhythmias as a side effect.
                
Some types of arrhythmia happen more often in children and young adults. Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (PSVT), including Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, is more common in young people. PSVT is a fast heart rate that begins and ends suddenly.
                
Major Risk Factors
                
Arrhythmias are more common in people who have diseases or conditions that weaken the heart, such as:
                
Heart attack
                
Heart failure or cardiomyopathy, which weakens the heart and changes the way electrical signals move through the heart
                
Heart tissue that's too thick or stiff or that hasn't formed normally
                
Leaking or narrowed heart valves, which make the heart work too hard and can lead to heart failure
                
Congenital heart defects (defects present at birth) that affect the heart's structure or function
                
Other conditions also can raise the risk for arrhythmias, such as:
                
High blood pressure
                
Infections that damage the heart muscle or the sac around the heart
                
Diabetes, which increases the risk of high blood pressure and coronary heart disease
                
Sleep apnea, which can stress the heart because the heart doesn't get enough oxygen
                
An overactive or underactive thyroid gland (too much or too little thyroid hormone in the body)
                
Several other risk factors also can raise your risk for arrhythmias. Examples include heart surgery, certain drugs (such as cocaine or amphetamines), or an imbalance of chemicals or other substances (such as potassium) in the bloodstream.
Many arrhythmias cause no signs or symptoms. When signs or symptoms are present, the most common ones are:
                
Palpitations (feelings that your heart is skipping a beat, fluttering, or beating too hard or fast)
                
A slow heartbeat
                
An irregular heartbeat
                
Feeling pauses between heartbeats
                
More serious signs and symptoms include:
                
Anxiety
                
Weakness, dizziness, and light-headedness
                
Fainting or nearly fainting
                
Sweating
                
Shortness of breath
                
Chest pain