Arts syndrome is characterized by sensorineural hearing loss and serious neurological and immune system problems in males. Females can also be affected by this condition, but they typically have much milder symptoms. Arts syndrome is caused by mutations in the PRPS1 gene which is located on the X chromosome. It is inherited in an X-linked recessive manner.
 Arts syndrome is caused by mutations in the PRPS1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate synthetase 1, or PRPP synthetase 1. This enzyme is involved in producing purines and pyrimidines, the building blocks of DNA, RNA, and molecules such as ATP and GTP that serve as energy sources in the cell. The PRPS1 mutations that cause Arts syndrome replace one protein building block (amino acid) with another amino acid in the PRPP synthetase 1 enzyme. The resulting enzyme is likely unstable, compromising its ability to perform its normal function. The disruption of purine and pyrimidine production may impair energy storage and transport in cells. Impairment of these processes may have a particularly severe effect on tissues that require a large amount of energy, such as the nervous system and the immune system, resulting in the neurological problems and immune dysfunction characteristic of Arts syndrome.
How  Arts syndrome is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. The gene associated with this condition is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only 1 X chromosome), a mutation in the only copy of the gene in each cell causes the disorder. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation in one of the two copies of the gene in each cell sometimes causes the disorder. Females with one copy of the mutated gene are typically much less severely affected.by Arts syndrome than males. In many cases, they do not experience any symptoms.  In the small number of Arts syndrome cases that have been identified, affected individuals have inherited the mutation from a mother who carries an altered copy of the PRPS1 gene.
Arts syndrome appears to be extremely rare. Only a few families with this disorder have been described in the medical literature.
Mutations in the PRPS1 gene cause Arts syndrome. The PRPS1 gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate synthetase 1, or PRPP synthetase 1. This enzyme is involved in producing purines and pyrimidines, which are building blocks of DNA, its chemical cousin RNA, and molecules such as ATP and GTP that serve as energy sources in the cell.  The PRPS1 gene mutations that cause Arts syndrome replace single protein building blocks (amino acids) in the PRPP synthetase 1 enzyme. The resulting enzyme is probably unstable, reducing or eliminating its ability to perform its function. The disruption of purine and pyrimidine production may impair energy storage and transport in cells. Impairment of these processes may have a particularly severe effect on tissues that require a large amount of energy, such as the nervous system, resulting in the neurological problems characteristic of Arts syndrome. The reason for the increased risk of respiratory infections in Arts syndrome is unclear.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Arts syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Arts Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Arts syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hearing Loss  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Movement, Uncoordinated  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Optic Nerve Atrophy   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care