Asperger syndrome (AS) is an autism spectrum disorder, a type of neurological condition characterized by impaired language and communication skills, and repetitive or restrictive thought and behavior patterns. Unlike many people with autism, those with AS retain their early language skills. Features of AS include an obsessive interest in a particular object or topic; high vocabulary; formal speech patterns; repetitive routines or habits; inappropriate social and emotional behavior; impaired non-verbal communication; and uncoordinated motor skills. AS is likely caused by a combination of genetic and environmental influences. While autism spectrum disorders including AS sometimes run in families, no specific inheritance pattern has been recognized.
 Autism spectrum disorders including Asperger syndrome sometimes "run in families," but no specific inheritance pattern has been recognized. The condition is likely caused by a combination of genetic and environmental factors, which means that not all people with a genetic predisposition will be affected. A consultation with a genetics professional is recommended for those with specific questions about genetic risks to themselves or family members.
Asperger syndrome (AS) is a developmental disorder. It is an autism spectrum disorder (ASD), one of a distinct group of neurological conditions characterized by a greater or lesser degree of impairment in language and communication skills, as well as repetitive or restrictive patterns of thought and behavior. Other ASDs include: classic autism, Rett syndrome, childhood disintegrative disorder, and pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified (usually referred to as PDD-NOS). Unlike children with autism, children with AS retain their early language skills.
                
The most distinguishing symptom of AS is a childs obsessive interest in a single object or topic to the exclusion of any other. Children with AS want to know everything about their topic of interest and their conversations with others will be about little else. Their expertise, high level of vocabulary, and formal speech patterns make them seem like little professors. Other characteristics of AS include repetitive routines or rituals; peculiarities in speech and language; socially and emotionally inappropriate behavior and the inability to interact successfully with peers; problems with non-verbal communication; and clumsy and uncoordinated motor movements.
                
Children with AS are isolated because of their poor social skills and narrow interests. They may approach other people, but make normal conversation impossible by inappropriate or eccentric behavior, or by wanting only to talk about their singular interest.Children with AS usually have a history of developmental delays in motor skills such as pedaling a bike, catching a ball, or climbing outdoor play equipment. They are often awkward and poorly coordinated with a walk that can appear either stilted or bouncy.
The ideal treatment for AS coordinates therapies that address the three core symptoms of the disorder: poor communication skills, obsessive or repetitive routines, and physical clumsiness. There is no single best treatment package for all children with AS, but most professionals agree that the earlier the intervention, the better.
                
An effective treatment program builds on the childs interests, offers a predictable schedule, teaches tasks as a series of simple steps, actively engages the childs attention in highly structured activities, and provides regular reinforcement of behavior. It may include social skills training, cognitive behavioral therapy, medication for co-existing conditions, and other measures.
With effective treatment, children with AS can learn to cope with their disabilities, but they may still find social situations and personal relationships challenging. Many adults with AS are able to work successfully in mainstream jobs, although they may continue to need encouragement and moral support to maintain an independent life.
Many of the Institutes at the NIH, including the NINDS, are sponsoring research to understand what causes AS and how it can be effectively treated. One study is using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to show how abnormalities in particular areas of the brain cause changes in brain function that result in the symptoms of AS and other ASDs.Other studies include aclinical trial testing the effectiveness of an anti-depressant in individuals with AS and HFA who exhibit high levels of obsessive/ritualistic behavior and a long-range study to collect and analyze DNA samples from a large group of children with AS and HFA and their families to identify genes and genetic interactions that are linked to AS and HFA.
The prevalence of Asperger syndrome is not well established. Estimates range from 1 in 250 to 1 in 5,000 children. Three to four times as many males are affected than females.  Because of changes in the way developmental disorders are classified, Asperger syndrome was not often diagnosed in adults until recently, and the prevalence is often perceived to be rising as more people are recognized to have features of the condition. Many mildly affected individuals likely continue to be undiagnosed.
While genetic factors are believed to contribute to the development of Asperger syndrome, no related genes have been confirmed. It is unclear whether certain gene variations that are being studied in other autism spectrum disorders will play a role in Asperger syndrome. It appears likely that a combination of genetic variations and environmental factors influence the development of this complex condition.  Asperger syndrome is a disorder of brain development. Researchers have identified differences in the structure and function of specific regions of the brain between children with Asperger syndrome and unaffected children. These differences likely arise during development before birth, when cells in the brain are migrating to their proper places.  The differences in brain development that occur in Asperger syndrome appear to affect areas of the brain involved in thought, behavior, and emotions, such as the prefrontal cortex, the amygdala, and the fusiform face area. In particular, cognitive functions called theory of mind, central coherence, and executive function are affected.  Theory of mind is the ability to understand that other people have their own ideas, emotions, and perceptions, and to empathize with them. It is related to the proper functioning of a brain mechanism called the mirror neuron system, which is normally active both when certain actions are performed and when others are observed performing the same actions. Researchers believe that the mirror neuron system is impaired in people with Asperger syndrome.  Central coherence is the ability to integrate individual perceptions into a larger context, commonly known as "seeing the big picture." For example, a person with Asperger syndrome may be able to describe individual trees in great detail without recognizing that they are part of a forest.  Executive function is the ability to plan and implement actions and develop problem-solving strategies. This function includes skills such as impulse control, self-monitoring, focusing attention appropriately, and cognitive flexibility. People with deficits in these skills may have difficulty in some activities of daily living and in social interactions.  The differences in cognitive functioning observed in people with Asperger syndrome are believed to give rise to the behavioral patterns characteristic of this condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Asperger syndrome:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Asperger syndrome 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Asperger syndrome 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Asperger syndrome 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Asperger syndrome 4  - Genetic Testing Registry: Asperger syndrome X-linked 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Asperger syndrome X-linked 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Asperger's disorder  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Asperger Syndrome  - National Institute of Mental Health: How is ASD treated?   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care