 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Atelosteogenesis type 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) 11 pairs of ribs - Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the ulna - Brachydactyly syndrome - Cleft palate - Clubbing - Club-shaped proximal femur - Coronal cleft vertebrae - Cryptorchidism - Depressed nasal bridge - Distal tapering femur - Elbow dislocation - Encephalocele - Fibular aplasia - Frontal bossing - Fused cervical vertebrae - Hypoplasia of midface - Laryngeal stenosis - Malar flattening - Multinucleated giant chondrocytes in epiphyseal cartilage - Narrow chest - Neonatal death - Polyhydramnios - Premature birth - Proptosis - Radial bowing - Rhizomelia - Short femur - Short humerus - Short metacarpal - Short metatarsal - Short neck - Short nose - Sporadic - Stillbirth - Talipes equinovarus - Thoracic platyspondyly - Tibial bowing - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Atelosteogenesis type 3 is a disorder that affects the development of bones throughout the body. Affected individuals are born with inward- and upward-turning feet (clubfeet) and dislocations of the hips, knees, and elbows. Bones in the spine, rib cage, pelvis, and limbs may be underdeveloped or in some cases absent. As a result of the limb bone abnormalities, individuals with this condition have very short arms and legs. Their hands and feet are wide, with broad fingers and toes that may be permanently bent (camptodactyly) or fused together (syndactyly). Characteristic facial features include a broad forehead, wide-set eyes (hypertelorism), and an underdeveloped nose. About half of affected individuals have an opening in the roof of the mouth (a cleft palate.)  Individuals with atelosteogenesis type 3 typically have an underdeveloped rib cage that affects the development and functioning of the lungs. As a result, affected individuals are usually stillborn or die shortly after birth from respiratory failure. Some affected individuals survive longer, usually with intensive medical support. They typically experience further respiratory problems as a result of weakness of the airways that can lead to partial closing, short pauses in breathing (apnea), or frequent infections. People with atelosteogenesis type 3 who survive past the newborn period may have learning disabilities and delayed language skills, which are probably caused by low levels of oxygen in the brain due to respiratory problems. As a result of their orthopedic abnormalities, they also have delayed development of motor skills such as standing and walking.
Atelosteogenesis type 3 is a rare disorder; its exact prevalence is unknown. About two dozen affected individuals have been identified.
Mutations in the FLNB gene cause atelosteogenesis type 3. The FLNB gene provides instructions for making a protein called filamin B. This protein helps build the network of protein filaments (cytoskeleton) that gives structure to cells and allows them to change shape and move. Filamin B attaches (binds) to another protein called actin and helps the actin to form the branching network of filaments that makes up the cytoskeleton. It also links actin to many other proteins to perform various functions within the cell, including the cell signaling that helps determine how the cytoskeleton will change as tissues grow and take shape during development.  Filamin B is especially important in the development of the skeleton before birth. It is active (expressed) in the cell membranes of cartilage-forming cells (chondrocytes). Cartilage is a tough, flexible tissue that makes up much of the skeleton during early development. Most cartilage is later converted to bone (a process called ossification), except for the cartilage that continues to cover and protect the ends of bones and is present in the nose, airways (trachea and bronchi), and external ears. Filamin B appears to be important for normal cell growth and division (proliferation) and maturation (differentiation) of chondrocytes and for the ossification of cartilage.  FLNB gene mutations that cause atelosteogenesis type 3 change single protein building blocks (amino acids) in the filamin B protein or delete a small section of the protein sequence, resulting in an abnormal protein. This abnormal protein appears to have a new, atypical function that interferes with the proliferation or differentiation of chondrocytes, impairing ossification and leading to the signs and symptoms of atelosteogenesis type 3.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Most cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of atelosteogenesis type 3:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: FLNB-Related Disorders  - Genetic Testing Registry: Atelosteogenesis type 3   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Atelosteogenesis type 2 is a severe disorder of cartilage and bone development. Infants born with this condition have very short arms and legs, a narrow chest, and a prominent, rounded abdomen. This disorder is also characterized by an opening in the roof of the mouth (a cleft palate), distinctive facial features, an inward- and upward-turning foot (clubfoot), and unusually positioned thumbs (hitchhiker thumbs).  The signs and symptoms of atelosteogenesis type 2 are similar to those of another skeletal disorder called diastrophic dysplasia; however, atelosteogenesis type 2 is typically more severe. As a result of serious health problems, infants with this disorder are usually stillborn or die soon after birth from respiratory failure. Some infants, however, have lived for a short time with intensive medical support.
Atelosteogenesis type 2 is an extremely rare genetic disorder; its incidence is unknown.
Atelosteogenesis type 2 is one of several skeletal disorders caused by mutations in the SLC26A2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is essential for the normal development of cartilage and for its conversion to bone. Cartilage is a tough, flexible tissue that makes up much of the skeleton during early development. Most cartilage is later converted to bone, except for the cartilage that continues to cover and protect the ends of bones and is present in the nose and external ears. Mutations in the SLC26A2 gene disrupt the structure of developing cartilage, preventing bones from forming properly and resulting in the skeletal problems characteristic of atelosteogenesis type 2.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of atelosteogenesis type 2:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Atelosteogenesis Type 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Atelosteogenesis type 2   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Atelosteogenesis type 1 is a disorder that affects the development of bones throughout the body. Affected individuals are born with inward- and upward-turning feet (clubfeet) and dislocations of the hips, knees, and elbows. Bones in the spine, rib cage, pelvis, and limbs may be underdeveloped or in some cases absent. As a result of the limb bone abnormalities, individuals with this condition have very short arms and legs. Characteristic facial features include a prominent forehead, wide-set eyes (hypertelorism), an upturned nose with a grooved tip, and a very small lower jaw and chin (micrognathia). Affected individuals may also have an opening in the roof of the mouth (a cleft palate). Males with this condition can have undescended testes.  Individuals with atelosteogenesis type 1 typically have an underdeveloped rib cage that affects the development and functioning of the lungs. As a result, affected individuals are usually stillborn or die shortly after birth from respiratory failure.
Atelosteogenesis type 1 is a rare disorder; its exact prevalence is unknown. Only a few dozen affected individuals have been identified.
Mutations in the FLNB gene cause atelosteogenesis type 1. The FLNB gene provides instructions for making a protein called filamin B. This protein helps build the network of protein filaments (cytoskeleton) that gives structure to cells and allows them to change shape and move. Filamin B attaches (binds) to another protein called actin and helps the actin to form the branching network of filaments that makes up the cytoskeleton. Filamin B also links actin to many other proteins to perform various functions within the cell, including the cell signaling that helps determine how the cytoskeleton will change as tissues grow and take shape during development.  Filamin B is especially important in the development of the skeleton before birth. It is active (expressed) in the cell membranes of cartilage-forming cells (chondrocytes). Cartilage is a tough, flexible tissue that makes up much of the skeleton during early development. Most cartilage is later converted to bone, a process called ossification, except for the cartilage that continues to cover and protect the ends of bones and is present in the nose, airways (trachea and bronchi), and external ears. Filamin B appears to be important for normal cell growth and division (proliferation) and maturation (differentiation) of chondrocytes and for the ossification of cartilage.  FLNB gene mutations that cause atelosteogenesis type 1 change single protein building blocks (amino acids) in the filamin B protein or delete a small section of the protein sequence, resulting in an abnormal protein. This abnormal protein appears to have a new, atypical function that interferes with the proliferation or differentiation of chondrocytes, impairing ossification and leading to the signs and symptoms of atelosteogenesis type 1.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Almost all cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of atelosteogenesis type 1:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: FLNB-Related Disorders  - Genetic Testing Registry: Atelosteogenesis type 1   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care