Atherosclerosis is a disease in which plaque builds up inside your arteries. Plaque is a sticky substance made up of fat, cholesterol, calcium, and other substances found in the blood. Over time, plaque hardens and narrows your arteries. That limits the flow of oxygen-rich blood to your body.    Atherosclerosis can lead to serious problems, including       - Coronary artery disease. These arteries supply blood to your heart. When they are blocked, you can suffer angina or a heart attack.    - Carotid artery disease. These arteries supply blood to your brain. When they are blocked you can suffer a stroke.    - Peripheral arterial disease. These arteries are in your arms, legs and pelvis. When they are blocked, you can suffer from numbness, pain and sometimes infections.       Atherosclerosis usually doesn't cause symptoms until it severely narrows or totally blocks an artery. Many people don't know they have it until they have a medical emergency.    A physical exam, imaging, and other diagnostic tests can tell if you have it. Medicines can slow the progress of plaque buildup. Your doctor may also recommend procedures such as angioplasty to open the arteries, or surgery on the coronary or carotid arteries. Lifestyle changes can also help. These include following a healthy diet, getting regular exercise, maintaining a healthy weight, quitting smoking, and managing stress.     NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
The exact cause of atherosclerosis isn't known. However, studies show that atherosclerosis is a slow, complex disease that may start in childhood. It develops faster as you age.
                
Atherosclerosis may start when certain factors damage the inner layers of the arteries. These factors include:
                
Smoking
                
High amounts of certain fats and cholesterol in the blood
                
High blood pressure
                
High amounts of sugar in the blood due to insulin resistance or diabetes
                
Plaque may begin to build up where the arteries are damaged. Over time, plaque hardens and narrows the arteries. Eventually, an area of plaque can rupture (break open).
                
When this happens, blood cell fragments called platelets (PLATE-lets) stick to the site of the injury. They may clump together to form blood clots. Clots narrow the arteries even more, limiting the flow of oxygen-rich blood to your body.
                
Depending on which arteries are affected, blood clots can worsen angina (chest pain) or cause a heart attack or stroke.
                
Researchers continue to look for the causes of atherosclerosis. They hope to find answers to questions such as:
                
Why and how do the arteries become damaged?
                
How does plaque develop and change over time?
                
Why does plaque rupture and lead to blood clots?
Taking action to control your risk factors can help prevent or delay atherosclerosis and its related diseases. Your risk for atherosclerosis increases with the number of risk factors youhave.
                
One step you can take is to adopt a healthy lifestyle, which can include:
                
Heart-Healthy Eating. Adopt heart-healthy eating habits, which include eating different fruits and vegetables (including beans and peas), whole grains, lean meats, poultry without skin, seafood, and fat-free or low-fat milk and dairy products. A heart-healthy diet is low in sodium, added sugar, solid fats, and refined grains. Following a heart-healthy diet is an important part of a healthy lifestyle.
                
Physical Activity. Be as physically active as you can. Physical activity can improve your fitness level and your health. Ask your doctor what types and amounts of activity are safe for you. Read more about Physical Activity and Your Heart.
                
Quit Smoking. If you smoke, quit. Smoking can damage and tighten blood vessels and raise your risk for atherosclerosis. Talk with your doctor about programs and products that can help you quit. Also, try to avoid secondhand smoke. Read more about Smoking and Your Heart.
                
Weight Control. If youre overweight or obese, work with your doctor to create a reasonable weight-loss plan. Controlling your weight helps you control risk factors foratherosclerosis.
                
Other steps that can prevent or delay atherosclerosis include knowing your family history of atherosclerosis. If you or someone in your family has an atherosclerosis-related disease, be sure to tell your doctor.
                
If lifestyle changes arent enough, your doctor may prescribe medicines to control your atherosclerosis risk factors. Take all of your medicines as your doctor advises.