An arrhythmia is a problem with the speed or rhythm of the heartbeat. Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common type of arrhythmia. The cause is a disorder in the heart's electrical system.      Often, people who have AF may not even feel symptoms. But you may feel        - Palpitations -- an abnormal rapid heartbeat    - Shortness of breath    - Weakness or difficulty exercising    - Chest pain    - Dizziness or fainting    - Fatigue    - Confusion        AF can lead to an increased risk of stroke. In many patients, it can also cause chest pain, heart attack, or heart failure.      Doctors diagnose AF using family and medical history, a physical exam, and a test called an electrocardiogram (EKG), which looks at the electrical waves your heart makes. Treatments include medicines and procedures to restore normal rhythm.     NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
Familial atrial fibrillation is an inherited heart condition that disrupts the heart's rhythm. It is characterized by erratic electrical activity in the heart's upper chambers (the atria), causing an irregular response in the heart's lower chambers (the ventricles). This causes a fast and irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia). Signs and symptoms may include dizziness, chest pain, palpitations, shortness of breath, or fainting. Affected people also have an increased risk of stroke and sudden death. While complications may occur at any age, some affected people never have associated health problems. Familial atrial fibrillation may be caused by changes (mutations) in any of various genes, some of which have not been identified. It is most often inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, but autosomal recessive inheritance has been reported.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Familial atrial fibrillation. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Thromboembolic stroke 75% Autosomal dominant inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 We are unaware of treatment recommendations specific to familial atrial fibrillation, but there is information available about treatment for atrial fibrillation in general. Treatment for atrial fibrillation depends on the frequency and severity of symptoms and may involve medications, medical procedures, and lifestyle changes. People who don't have symptoms or related heart problems may not need treatment. The main goals of treatment include: Preventing blot clots and lowering risk of stroke. This may involve blood-thinning medications such as warfarin, dabigatran, heparin, and aspirin. Controlling the rate of contractions of the ventricles (rate control). This may involve medications to restore the heart rate to a normal level, such as beta blockers, calcium channel blockers, and digitalis. Restoring a normal heart rhythm (rhythm control). This is typically for people who don't do well with rate control treatment, or for people who recently began having symptoms. Rhythm control may involve medications or procedures and is usually begun in a hospital for monitoring. Procedures may include cardioversion, catheter ablation, or maze surgery.
Atrial fibrillation (AF) occurs if the heart's electrical signals don't travel through the heart in a normal way. Instead, they become very rapid and disorganized.
                
Damage to the heart's electrical system causes AF. The damage most often is the result of other conditions that affect the health of the heart, such as high blood pressure and coronary heart disease.
                
The risk of AF increases as you age. Inflammation also is thought to play a role in causing AF.
                
Sometimes, the cause of AF is unknown.
Atrial fibrillation (AF) affects millions of people, and the number is rising. Men are more likely than women to have the condition. In the United States, AF is more common among Whites than African Americans or Hispanic Americans.
                
The risk of AF increases as you age. This is mostly because your risk for heart disease and other conditions that can cause AF also increases as you age. However, about half of the people who have AF are younger than 75.
                
AF is uncommon in children.
                
Major Risk Factors
                
AF is more common in people who have:
                
High blood pressure
                
Coronary heart disease (CHD)
                
Heart failure
                
Rheumatic (ru-MAT-ik) heart disease
                
Structural heart defects, such as mitral valve prolapse
                
Pericarditis (PER-i-kar-DI-tis; a condition in which the membrane, or sac, around your heart is inflamed)
                
Congenital heart defects
                
Sick sinus syndrome (a condition in which the heart's electrical signals don't fire properly and the heart rate slows down; sometimes the heart will switch back and forth between a slow rate and a fast rate)
                
AF also is more common in people who are having heart attacks or who have just had surgery.
                
Other Risk Factors
                
Other conditions that raise your risk for AF include hyperthyroidism (too much thyroid hormone), obesity, diabetes, and lung disease.
                
Certain factors also can raise your risk for AF. For example, drinking large amounts of alcohol, especially binge drinking, raises your risk. Even modest amounts of alcohol can trigger AF in some people. Caffeine or psychological stress also may trigger AF in some people.
                
Some data suggest that people who have sleep apnea are at greater risk for AF. Sleep apnea is a common disorder that causes one or more pauses in breathing or shallow breaths while you sleep.
                
Metabolic syndrome also raises your risk for AF. Metabolic syndrome is the name for a group of risk factors that raises your risk for CHD and other health problems, such as diabetes and stroke.
                
Research suggests that people who receive high-dose steroid therapy are at increased risk for AF. This therapy is used for asthma and some inflammatory conditions. It may act as a trigger in people who have other AF risk factors.
                
Genetic factors also may play a role in causing AF. However, their role isn't fully known.
Atrial fibrillation (AF) usually causes the heart's lower chambers, the ventricles, to contract faster than normal.
                
When this happens, the ventricles can't completely fill with blood. Thus, they may not be able to pump enough blood to the lungs and body. This can lead to signs and symptoms, such as:
                
Palpitations (feelings that your heart is skipping a beat, fluttering, or beating too hard or fast)
                
Shortness of breath
                
Weakness or problems exercising
                
Chest pain
                
Dizziness or fainting
                
Fatigue (tiredness)
                
Confusion
                
Atrial Fibrillation Complications
                
AF has two major complicationsstroke and heart failure.
                
Stroke
                
During AF, the heart's upper chambers, the atria, don't pump all of their blood to the ventricles. Some blood pools in the atria. When this happens, a blood clot (also called a thrombus) can form.
                
If the clot breaks off and travels to the brain, it can cause a stroke. (A clot that forms in one part of the body and travels in the bloodstream to another part of the body is called an embolus.)
                
Blood-thinning medicines that reduce the risk of stroke are an important part of treatment for people who have AF.
                
Atrial Fibrillation and Stroke
                

                
Heart Failure
                
Heart failure occurs if the heart can't pump enough blood to meet the body's needs. AF can lead to heart failure because the ventricles are beating very fast and can't completely fill with blood. Thus, they may not be able to pump enough blood to the lungs and body.
                
Fatigue and shortness of breath are common symptoms of heart failure. A buildup of fluid in the lungs causes these symptoms. Fluid also can build up in the feet, ankles, and legs, causing weight gain.
                
Lifestyle changes, medicines, and procedures or surgery (rarely, a mechanical heart pump or heart transplant) are the main treatments for heart failure.
Following a healthy lifestyle and taking steps to lower your risk for heart disease may help you prevent atrial fibrillation (AF). These steps include:
                
Following a heart healthy diet that's low in saturated fat, trans fat, and cholesterol. A healthy diet includes a variety of whole grains, fruits, and vegetables daily.
                
Not smoking.
                
Being physically active.
                
Maintaining a healthy weight.
                
If you already have heart disease or other AF risk factors, work with your doctor to manage your condition. In addition to adopting the healthy habits above, which can help control heart disease, your doctor may advise you to: 
                
Follow the DASH eating plan to help lower your blood pressure.
                
Keep your cholesterol and triglycerides at healthy levels with dietary changes and medicines (if prescribed).
                
Limit or avoid alcohol.
                
Control your blood sugar level if you have diabetes.
                
Get ongoing medical care and take your medicines as prescribed.
                
For more information about following a healthy lifestyle, visit the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute's Aim for a Healthy Weight Web site, "Your Guide to a Healthy Heart," "Your Guide to Lowering Your Blood Pressure With DASH," and "Your Guide to Physical Activity and Your Heart."
Atrial fibrillation (AF) describes the rapid, irregular beating of the left atrium (upper chamber) of the heart. These rapid contractions of the heart are weaker than normal contractions, resulting in slow flow of blood in the atrium. The blood pools and becomes sluggish and can result in the formation of blood clots. If a clot leaves the heart and travels to the brain, it can cause a stroke by blocking the flow of blood through cerebral arteries. Some people with AF have no symptoms, but others may experience a fluttering feeling in the area of the chest above the heart, chest pain, lightheadness or fainting, shortness of breath, and fatigue. AF is diagnosed by an electrocardiogram (ECG), a device that records the hearts electrical activity. Other tests are often performed to rule out contributing causes, such as high blood pressure, an overactive thyroid gland, heart failure, faulty heart valves, lung disease, and stimulant or alcohol abuse. Some people will have no identifiable cause for their AF.
Within a few hours after onset of a stroke, treatment with drugs or devices that dissolve or break up the clot can restore blood flow to the brain and lead to a better recovery. To prevent strokes related to AF, doctors often prescribe medications to prevent formation of clots in the heart, which can travel to the brain and cause stroke. Immediately after a stroke, doctors may temporarily administer heparin by injection, while starting an oral medication for long-term protection from clots. The most commonly used drug has been warfarin. People taking warfarin must be closely monitored to make sure their blood is thin enough to prevent clots, but not so thin as to promote bleeding. Since some foods, vitamin supplements, and medications can affect warfarin action, keeping the blood just thin enough can be tricky. More recently, a number of new blood thinners, including dabigatran, rivaroxaban, and apixaban, have been shown to be as effective as warfarin in stroke prevention. These newer medications do not require regular blood test monitoring and may have less tendency to cause bleeding due to making the blood too thin. Some individuals with AF may have a lower risk of stroke and may be treated with aspirin, either alone or with another antiplatelet agency like clopidogrel. Other treatments for AF include medications such as beta blockers or calcium channel blockers to slow the heartbeat, and anti-arrhythmic drugs or electrical cardioversion (which delivers an electrical shock to the heart) to normalize the heartbeat.
AF, which affects as many as 2.2 million Americans, increases an individuals risk of stroke by 4 to 6 times on average. The risk increases with age. In people over 80 years old, AF is the direct cause of 1 in 4 strokes. Treating individuals with warfarin or new blood thinners reduces the rate of stroke for those who have AF by approximately one-half to two- thirds. People with AF can have multiple strokes, including silent strokes (strokes that don't show physical symptoms but show up on a brain scan) that, over time, can cause dementia, so prevention is important.
The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) is the leading Federal agency directing and funding research relevant to AF and stroke prevention. The NINDS conducts basic and clinical research in its laboratories and clinics at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and also supports additional research through grants to major research institutions across the country. Much of this research focuses on finding better ways to prevent, treat, and ultimately cure disorders such as AF that can increase the risk of stroke.
Familial atrial fibrillation is an inherited condition that disrupts the heart's normal rhythm. This condition is characterized by uncoordinated electrical activity in the heart's upper chambers (the atria), which causes the heartbeat to become fast and irregular. If untreated, this abnormal heart rhythm can lead to dizziness, chest pain, a sensation of fluttering or pounding in the chest (palpitations), shortness of breath, or fainting (syncope). Atrial fibrillation also increases the risk of stroke and sudden death. Complications of familial atrial fibrillation can occur at any age, although some people with this heart condition never experience any health problems associated with the disorder.
Atrial fibrillation is the most common type of sustained abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia), affecting more than 3 million people in the United States. The risk of developing this irregular heart rhythm increases with age. The incidence of the familial form of atrial fibrillation is unknown; however, recent studies suggest that up to 30 percent of all people with atrial fibrillation may have a history of the condition in their family.
A small percentage of all cases of familial atrial fibrillation are associated with changes in the KCNE2, KCNJ2, and KCNQ1 genes. These genes provide instructions for making proteins that act as channels across the cell membrane. These channels transport positively charged atoms (ions) of potassium into and out of cells. In heart (cardiac) muscle, the ion channels produced from the KCNE2, KCNJ2, and KCNQ1 genes play critical roles in maintaining the heart's normal rhythm. Mutations in these genes have been identified in only a few families worldwide. These mutations increase the activity of the channels, which changes the flow of potassium ions between cells. This disruption in ion transport alters the way the heart beats, increasing the risk of syncope, stroke, and sudden death.  Most cases of atrial fibrillation are not caused by mutations in a single gene. This condition is often related to structural abnormalities of the heart or underlying heart disease. Additional risk factors for atrial fibrillation include high blood pressure (hypertension), diabetes mellitus, a previous stroke, or an accumulation of fatty deposits and scar-like tissue in the lining of the arteries (atherosclerosis). Although most cases of atrial fibrillation are not known to run in families, studies suggest that they may arise partly from genetic risk factors. Researchers are working to determine which genetic changes may influence the risk of atrial fibrillation.
Familial atrial fibrillation appears to be inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of familial atrial fibrillation:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Atrial fibrillation, familial, 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Atrial fibrillation, familial, 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Atrial fibrillation, familial, 3  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Arrhythmias  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Atrial fibrillation/flutter   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care