Optic atrophy 1 is a condition that mainly affects vision, but may include other features. Vision loss typically begins within the first decade of life; severity varies widely among affected people (from nearly normal vision to complete blindness), even among members of the same family. Vision problems may include difficulty distinguishing colors, progressive narrowing of the field of vision (tunnel vision) and an abnormally pale appearance (pallor) of the optic nerve. Additional, less common abnormalities may include sensorineural hearing loss, ataxia, myopathy (muscle disease) and other neurological findings. It is usually caused by mutations in the OPA1 gene, although some individuals with optic atrophy 1 do not have identified mutations in this gene, in which case the cause of the condition is unknown. This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern but some cases result from a new mutation in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Treatment focuses on individual symptoms when possible.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Optic atrophy 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Strabismus 10% Horizontal nystagmus 5% Progressive external ophthalmoplegia 48/104 Proximal muscle weakness 37/104 Ataxia 31/104 Abnormal amplitude of pattern reversal visual evoked potentials - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Central scotoma - Centrocecal scotoma - Incomplete penetrance - Insidious onset - Optic atrophy - Red-green dyschromatopsia - Reduced visual acuity - Tritanomaly - Visual impairment - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Optic atrophy 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Absent Achilles reflex - Babinski sign - Dysarthria - Dysdiadochokinesis - Hyperactive patellar reflex - Intellectual disability - Optic atrophy - Tremor - X-linked inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Autosomal dominant optic atrophy and cataract. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of extrapyramidal motor function - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Cataract - Optic atrophy - Reduced visual acuity - Tremor - Visual impairment - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Optic atrophy 6. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Infantile onset - Optic atrophy - Photophobia - Red-green dyschromatopsia - Slow progression - Visual impairment - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Optic atrophy 5. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Central scotoma - Optic atrophy - Slow decrease in visual acuity - Tritanomaly - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Optic atrophy polyneuropathy deafness. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Areflexia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Broad-based gait - Distal muscle weakness - Distal sensory impairment - Distal upper limb amyotrophy - Gait ataxia - Joint contracture of the hand - Optic atrophy - Pectus excavatum - Peripheral demyelination - Positive Romberg sign - Progressive sensorineural hearing impairment - Short thumb - Thoracic scoliosis - Ulnar deviation of the hand - Variable expressivity - Visual impairment - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Dominant optic atrophy (DOA) is an inherited optic nerve disorder characterized by degeneration of the optic nerves. It typically starts during the first decade of life. Affected people usually develop moderate visual loss and color vision defects. The severity varies and visual acuity can range from normal to legal blindness. About 20% of people with DOA have non-ocular features, such as sensorineural hearing loss; myopathy; peripheral neuropathy; multiple sclerosis-like illness; and spastic paraplegia (impaired function of the legs). These cases may be referred to as 'DOA plus.' DOA is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner and may be caused by a mutation in any of several genes, some of which have not been identified. There is currently no way to prevent or cure DOA, but affected people may benefit from low vision aids.
How  Dominant optic atrophy (DOA) is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that having a change (mutation) in only one copy of the responsible gene in each cell is enough to cause features of the condition. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutated gene from a parent. In other cases, the mutation occurs for the first time in an affected person and is not inherited from a parent (a de novo mutation). When a person with a mutation that causes DOA has children, each child has a 50% (1 in 2) chance to inherit the mutation. While a mutation responsible for DOA can cause the condition, not all people with a mutation will develop DOA. This means that DOA has reduced penetrance. There are likely to be other genetic and environmental factors that influence whether a person with a mutation will develop features of DOA. Additionally, not all people who do develop features will be affected the same way, and severity can vary - even within families. This phenomenon is known as variable expressivity. People with questions about genetic risks or genetic testing for themselves or family members are encouraged to speak with a genetics professional.
 There is currently no cure for dominant optic atrophy (DOA). Management generally consists of regular eye exams, including measurement of visual acuity, color vision, visual fields and optical coherence tomography (OCT). Currently there is no specific treatment, but low-vision aids in individuals with severely decreased visual acuity can be helpful. A preliminary study published in February 2013 found that several individuals with specific OPA1 mutations who underwent idebenone therapy (which has been used to treat some cases of Leber hereditary optic neuropathy) experienced some improvement of visual function. However, more thorough research is necessary to confirm these findings. Acupuncture is also being studied as a potential treatment. Avoiding tobacco and alcohol intake and certain medications (antibiotics, antivirals), which can interfere with mitochondrial metabolism, may help to slow the progression. Cochlear implants have been shown to markedly improve hearing in individuals with sensorineural hearing loss.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Optic atrophy 1 and deafness. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Ataxia 5% Abnormal amplitude of pattern reversal visual evoked potentials - Abnormal auditory evoked potentials - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Central scotoma - Centrocecal scotoma - Horizontal nystagmus - Increased variability in muscle fiber diameter - Myopathy - Ophthalmoplegia - Optic atrophy - Peripheral neuropathy - Phenotypic variability - Progressive sensorineural hearing impairment - Ptosis - Red-green dyschromatopsia - Reduced visual acuity - Strabismus - Tritanomaly - Visual impairment - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Autosomal dominant optic atrophy plus syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Impaired pain sensation 90% Optic atrophy 90% Sensorineural hearing impairment 90% Abnormality of color vision 50% Visual impairment 50% Abnormality of visual evoked potentials 7.5% Decreased nerve conduction velocity 7.5% Strabismus 7.5% Ataxia 5% Abnormal amplitude of pattern reversal visual evoked potentials - Abnormal auditory evoked potentials - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Central scotoma - Centrocecal scotoma - Horizontal nystagmus - Increased variability in muscle fiber diameter - Myopathy - Ophthalmoplegia - Peripheral neuropathy - Phenotypic variability - Progressive sensorineural hearing impairment - Ptosis - Red-green dyschromatopsia - Reduced visual acuity - Tritanomaly - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Optic atrophy type 1 is a condition that affects vision. Individuals with this condition have progressive vision loss that typically begins within the first decade of life. The severity of the vision loss varies widely among affected people, even among members of the same family. People with this condition can range from having nearly normal vision to complete blindness. The vision loss usually progresses slowly.  People with optic atrophy type 1 frequently have problems with color vision that make it difficult or impossible to distinguish between shades of blue and green. Other vision problems associated with this condition include a progressive narrowing of the field of vision (tunnel vision) and an abnormally pale appearance (pallor) of the nerve that relays visual information from the eye to the brain (optic nerve). Optic nerve pallor can be detected during an eye examination.
Optic atrophy type 1 is estimated to affect 1 in 50,000 people worldwide. This condition is more common in Denmark, where it affects approximately 1 in 10,000 people.
Optic atrophy type 1 is caused by mutations in the OPA1 gene. The protein produced from this gene is made in many types of cells and tissues throughout the body. The OPA1 protein is found inside mitochondria, which are the energy-producing centers of cells. The OPA1 protein plays a key role in the organization of the shape and structure of the mitochondria and in the self-destruction of cells (apoptosis). The OPA1 protein is also involved in a process called oxidative phosphorylation, from which cells derive much of their energy. Additionally, the protein plays a role in the maintenance of the small amount of DNA within mitochondria, called mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA).  Mutations in the OPA1 gene lead to overall dysfunction of mitochondria. The structure of the mitochondria become disorganized and cells are more susceptible to self-destruction. OPA1 gene mutations lead to mitochondria with reduced energy-producing capabilities. The maintenance of mtDNA is also sometimes impaired, resulting in mtDNA mutations.  The vision problems experienced by people with optic atrophy type 1 are due to mitochondrial dysfunction, leading to the breakdown of structures that transmit visual information from the eyes to the brain. Affected individuals first experience a progressive loss of nerve cells within the retina, called retinal ganglion cells. The loss of these cells is followed by the degeneration (atrophy) of the optic nerve. The optic nerve is partly made up of specialized extensions of retinal ganglion cells called axons; when the retinal ganglion cells die, the optic nerve cannot transmit visual information to the brain normally.  It is unclear why the OPA1 gene mutations that cause optic atrophy type 1 only affect the eyes. Retinal ganglion cells have many mitochondria and especially high energy requirements, which researchers believe may make them particularly vulnerable to mitochondrial dysfunction and decreases in energy production.  Some individuals with optic atrophy type 1 do not have identified mutations in the OPA1 gene. In these cases, the cause of the condition is unknown.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of optic atrophy type 1:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Optic Atrophy Type 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Dominant hereditary optic atrophy  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Optic Nerve Atrophy  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Visual Acuity Test   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care