Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA) is a progressive brain disorder that causes involuntary movements; mental and emotional problems; and a decline in thinking ability. The average age of onset of DRPLA is 30 years, but the condition can appear anytime from infancy to mid-adulthood. Specific signs and symptoms may differ among affected individuals and sometimes affects children and adults differently. DRPLA is caused by a mutation in the ATN1 gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive.
The signs and symptoms of DRPLA differ somewhat between affected children and adults. When DRPLA appears before age 20, it most often involves episodes of involuntary muscle jerking or twitching (myoclonus); seizures; behavioral changes; intellectual disability; and problems with balance and coordination (ataxia). Epileptic seizures occur in all individuals with onset before 20 years of age. When DRPLA begins after age 20, the most frequent signs and symptoms are ataxia; uncontrollable movements of the limbs (choreoathetosis); psychiatric symptoms such as delusions; and deterioration of intellectual function (dementia). Seizures are less frequent in individuals with onset between the ages of 20 and 40. Seizures are rare in individuals with onset after age 40. Individuals who have inherited the condition from an affected parent typically have symptoms 26 to 29 years earlier than affected fathers, and 14 to 15 years earlier than affected mothers. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Atrophy of the dentate nucleus 90% Fetal cystic hygroma 90% Ataxia 25/25 Dementia 14/25 Seizures 12/25 Nystagmus 9/25 Chorea 7/25 Myoclonus 6/25 Abnormal pyramidal signs 5/25 Autosomal dominant inheritance - Choreoathetosis - Genetic anticipation - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 DRPLA is caused by a mutation in the ATN1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called atrophin 1. Although the function of atrophin 1 is unclear, it likely plays an important role in nerve cells (neurons) in many areas of the brain. The ATN1 mutation that causes DRPLA involves a DNA segment known as a CAG trinucleotide repeat. This segment is made up of a series of three DNA building blocks (cytosine, adenine, and guanine) that appear multiple times in a row on the gene. Normally, this CAG segment is repeated 6 to 35 times within the ATN1 gene. In people with DRPLA, the CAG segment is repeated at least 48 times (and sometimes much more). The abnormally long CAG trinucleotide repeat changes the structure of the atrophin 1 protein, which then accumulates in neurons and interferes with normal cell functions. The dysfunction and eventual death of these neurons lead to the signs and symptoms associated with DRPLA.
 There is no cure for DRPLA; treatment is generally symptomatic and supportive. Management of signs and symptoms may include:  Treatment of seizures with anti-epileptic drugs Treatment of psychiatric problems with appropriate psychotropic medications Adaptation of environment and care to the level of dementia Adaptation of educational programs for affected children.
Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy, commonly known as DRPLA, is a progressive brain disorder that causes involuntary movements, mental and emotional problems, and a decline in thinking ability. The average age of onset of DRPLA is 30 years, but this condition can appear anytime from infancy to mid-adulthood.  The signs and symptoms of DRPLA differ somewhat between affected children and adults. When DRPLA appears before age 20, it most often involves episodes of involuntary muscle jerking or twitching (myoclonus), seizures, behavioral changes, intellectual disability, and problems with balance and coordination (ataxia). When DRPLA begins after age 20, the most frequent signs and symptoms are ataxia, uncontrollable movements of the limbs (choreoathetosis), psychiatric symptoms such as delusions, and deterioration of intellectual function (dementia).
DRPLA is most common in the Japanese population, where it has an estimated incidence of 2 to 7 per million people. This condition has also been seen in families from North America and Europe.  Although DRPLA is rare in the United States, it has been studied in a large African American family from the Haw River area of North Carolina. When the family was first identified, researchers named the disorder Haw River syndrome. Later, researchers determined that Haw River syndrome and DRPLA are the same condition.
DRPLA is caused by a mutation in the ATN1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called atrophin 1. Although the function of atrophin 1 is unclear, it likely plays an important role in nerve cells (neurons) in many areas of the brain.  The ATN1 mutation that underlies DRPLA involves a DNA segment known as a CAG trinucleotide repeat. This segment is made up of a series of three DNA building blocks (cytosine, adenine, and guanine) that appear multiple times in a row. Normally, this segment is repeated 6 to 35 times within the ATN1 gene. In people with DRPLA, the CAG segment is repeated at least 48 times, and the repeat region may be two or three times its usual length. The abnormally long CAG trinucleotide repeat changes the structure of atrophin 1. This altered protein accumulates in neurons and interferes with normal cell functions. The dysfunction and eventual death of these neurons lead to uncontrolled movements, intellectual decline, and the other characteristic features of DRPLA.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person has one parent with the condition.  As the altered ATN1 gene is passed from one generation to the next, the size of the CAG trinucleotide repeat often increases in size. Larger repeat expansions are usually associated with an earlier onset of the disorder and more severe signs and symptoms. This phenomenon is called anticipation. Anticipation tends to be more prominent when the ATN1 gene is inherited from a person's father (paternal inheritance) than when it is inherited from a person's mother (maternal inheritance).
These resources address the diagnosis or management of DRPLA:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: DRPLA  - Genetic Testing Registry: Dentatorubral pallidoluysian atrophy  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Dementia  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Epilepsy   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care