Blood Flow to the Heart Is Blocked The heart works 24 hours a day, pumping oxygen and nutrient-rich blood to the body. Blood is supplied to the heart through its coronary arteries. If a blood clot suddenly blocks a coronary artery, it cuts off most or all blood supply to the heart, and a heart attack results. If blood flow isn't restored quickly, the section of heart muscle begins to die. The more time that passes without treatment to restore blood flow, the greater the damage to the heart. Affects Both Men and Women Heart attacks are a leading killer of both men and women in the United States. Each year, more than one million people in the U.S. have a heart attack and about half of them die. Half of those who die do so within one hour of the start of symptoms and before reaching the hospital. The good news is that excellent treatments are available for heart attacks. These treatments can save lives and prevent disabilities. Prompt Treatment Is Important Heart attack treatment works best when it's given right after symptoms occur. Prompt treatment of a heart attack can help prevent or limit damage to the heart and prevent sudden death. Call 9-1-1 Right Away A heart attack is an emergency. Call 9-1-1 for an ambulance right away -- within 5 minutes -- if you think you or someone else may be having a heart attack. You also should call for help if your chest pain doesn't go away as it usually does when you take medicine prescribed for angina (chest pain). Do not drive to the hospital or let someone else drive you. Emergency personnel in the ambulance can begin life-saving treatment on the way to the emergency room. They carry drugs and equipment that can help your medical condition, including - oxygen   - aspirin to prevent further blood clotting   - heart medications, such as nitroglycerin   - pain relief treatments  - defibrillators that can restart the heart if it stops beating.  oxygen aspirin to prevent further blood clotting heart medications, such as nitroglycerin pain relief treatments defibrillators that can restart the heart if it stops beating. If blood flow in the blocked artery can be restored quickly, permanent heart damage may be prevented. Yet, many people do not seek medical care for 2 hours or more after symptoms start.
If You Have Symptoms, Call 9-1-1 Diagnosis and treatment of a heart attack can begin when emergency personnel arrive after you call 9-1-1. Do not put off calling 9-1-1 because you are not sure that you are having a heart attack. Call within 5 minutes of the start of symptoms. At the hospital emergency room, doctors will work fast to find out if you are having or have had a heart attack. They will consider your symptoms, medical and family history, and test results. Initial tests will be quickly followed by treatment if you are having a heart attack. Diagnostic Tests - an electrocardiogram  - blood tests  - nuclear heart scan  - cardiac catheterization  - and coronary angiography. an electrocardiogram blood tests nuclear heart scan cardiac catheterization and coronary angiography. The electrocardiogram, also known as ECG or EKG, is used to measure the rate and regularity of your heartbeat. Blood tests are also used in diagnosing a heart attack. When cells in the heart die, they release enzymes into the blood. They are called markers or biomarkers. Measuring the amount of these markers in the blood can show how much damage was done to your heart. Doctors often repeat these tests to check for changes. The nuclear heart scan uses radioactive tracers to outline the heart chambers and major blood vessels leading to and from the heart. A nuclear heart scan shows any damage to your heart muscle as well as how well blood flows to and from the heart. In cardiac catheterization, a thin, flexible tube is passed through an artery in your groin or arm to reach the coronary arteries. This test allows your doctor to - determine blood pressure and flow in the heart's chambers  - collect blood samples from the heart, and  - examine the arteries of the heart by x-ray. determine blood pressure and flow in the heart's chambers collect blood samples from the heart, and examine the arteries of the heart by x-ray. Coronary angiography is usually done with the cardiac catheterization. A dye that can be seen on an x-ray is injected through the catheter into the coronary arteries. It shows where there are blockages and how severe they are.
Coronary heart disease, or CHD, is the most common underlying cause of a heart attack. Coronary arteries are the blood vessels that bring blood and oxygen to the heart muscle. Most heart attacks are caused by a blood clot that blocks one of the coronary arteries. When blood cannot reach part of your heart, that area starves for oxygen. If the blockage continues long enough, cells in the affected area die.
Most heart attacks involve discomfort in the center of the chest that lasts more than a few minutes or goes away and comes back. The discomfort can feel like uncomfortable pressure, squeezing, fullness, or pain. It can include pain or numbness in one or both arms, the back, neck, jaw, or stomach. Heart attack pain can sometimes feel like indigestion or heartburn. Shortness of breath often happens along with, or before chest discomfort. Other symptoms may include breaking out in a cold sweat, having nausea and vomiting, or feeling light-headed or dizzy. Symptoms vary, and some people have no symptoms. Know the symptoms of a heart attack so you can act fast to get treatment.
Very common. Each year, more than 1 million people in the U.S. have a heart attack and about half of them die. About one-half of those who die do so within 1 hour of the start of symptoms and before reaching the hospital.
Certain factors increase the risk of developing coronary heart disease and having a heart attack. These risk factors include some things you cannot change. You are at greater risk if you -  are a man over age 45 or a woman over age 55.  -  have a family history of early heart disease -- heart disease in a father or brother before age 55 or in a mother or sister before age 65.   - have a personal history of angina or previous heart attack.   -  have had a heart procedure, such as angioplasty or heart bypass. are a man over age 45 or a woman over age 55. have a family history of early heart disease -- heart disease in a father or brother before age 55 or in a mother or sister before age 65. have a personal history of angina or previous heart attack. have had a heart procedure, such as angioplasty or heart bypass. Importantly, there are many risk factors for heart attack that you CAN change, including -  smoking  - being obese or overweight  - being physically inactive   -  having high blood pressure, high blood cholesterol or diabetes. smoking being obese or overweight being physically inactive having high blood pressure, high blood cholesterol or diabetes.
If you are having a heart attack, doctors will work quickly to restore blood flow to the heart and continuously monitor vital signs to detect and treat complications. Restoring blood flow to the heart can prevent or limit damage to the heart muscle and help prevent another heart attack. Doctors may use clot-busting drugs called thrombolytics and procedures, such as angioplasty. Long-term treatment after a heart attack may include cardiac rehabilitation, checkups and tests, lifestyle changes, and medications.
Lowering your risk factors for coronary heart disease can help you prevent a heart attack. Even if you already have coronary heart disease, you still can take steps to lower your risk for a heart attack. These steps involve following a heart-healthy lifestyle and getting ongoingmedical care.
                
Heart-Healthy Lifestyle
                
A heart-healthy lifestyle can help prevent a heart attack and includes heart-healthy eating, being physically active, quitting smoking, managing stress, and managing your weight.
                
Ongoing Care
                
Treat Related Conditions
                
Treating conditions that make a heart attack more likely also can help lower your risk for a heart attack. These conditions may include:
                
Diabetes (high blood sugar). If you have diabetes, try to control your blood sugar level through diet and physical activity (as your doctor recommends). If needed, take medicine as prescribed.
                
High blood cholesterol. Your doctor may prescribe a statin medicine to lower your cholesterol if diet and exercise arent enough.
                
High blood pressure. Your doctor may prescribe medicine to keep your blood pressure under control.
                
Have an Emergency Action Plan
                
Make sure that you have an emergency action plan in case you or someone in your family has a heart attack. This is very important if youre at high risk for, or have already had, a heart attack.
                
Write down a list of medicines you are taking, medicines you are allergic to, your health care providers phone numbers (both during and after office hours), and contact information for a friend or relative. Keep the list in a handy place (for example, fill out this wallet card) to share in a medical emergency.
                
Talk with your doctor about the signs and symptoms of a heart attack, when you should call 911, and steps you can take while waiting for medical help to arrive.