Autosomal recessive hyper IgE syndrome (AR-HIES) is a very rare primary immunodeficiency syndrome characterized by highly elevated blood levels of immunoglobulin E (IgE), recurrent staphylococcal skin abscesses, and recurrent pneumonia. The same features are also seen in the more frequent autosomal dominant HIES syndrome. AR-HIES accounts for only a small minority of HIES cases, with about 130 affected families reported so far. In contrast to AD-HIES, the AR variant is further characterized by extreme hypereosinophilia (increase in the eosinophil count in the bloodstream); susceptibility to viral infections such as Herpes simplex and Molluscum contagiosum; involvement of the central nervous system; T-cell defects; and a high death rate. The dental, skeletal, connective tissue, and facial features present in AD-HIES are absent in AR-HIES. AR-HIES is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion and is caused by mutations in the DOCK8 gene.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Autosomal recessive hyper IgE syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Asthma 90% Cellular immunodeficiency 90% Decreased antibody level in blood 90% Eczema 90% Otitis media 90% Sinusitis 90% Skin ulcer 90% Verrucae 90% Atopic dermatitis - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cerebral vasculitis - Eosinophilia - Hemiplegia - Infantile onset - Neoplasm - Recurrent bacterial infections - Recurrent fungal infections - Recurrent sinopulmonary infections - Recurrent viral infections - Subarachnoid hemorrhage - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.