The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar ataxia autosomal recessive 8. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Incoordination 90% Cerebellar atrophy - Dysarthria - Dysmetria - Gait ataxia - Limb ataxia - Nystagmus - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar ataxia autosomal recessive with axonal neuropathy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Ataxia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Distal amyotrophy - Peripheral axonal neuropathy - Pes cavus - Steppage gait - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Spinocerebellar ataxia autosomal recessive 7, also called SCAR7, is a slowly progressive hereditary form of spinocerebellar ataxia.  Symptoms of SCAR7 can include difficulty walking and writing, speech difficulties (dysarthria), limb ataxia, and a decrease in the size of a region of the brain called the cerebellum (cerebellar atrophy). Of the few reported cases in the literature, some patients also had eye involvement that included nystagmus (in voluntary eye movements) and saccadic pursuit eye movements.  Out of 5 affected siblings examined in a large Dutch family, 2 became wheelchair-dependent late in life. The severity of the symptoms varies from mild to severe.  SCAR7 is caused by mutations in the TPP1 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar ataxia autosomal recessive 7. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Ataxia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Babinski sign - Cerebellar atrophy - Clumsiness - Diplopia - Dysarthria - Gait ataxia - Hypermetric saccades - Hyperreflexia - Juvenile onset - Limb ataxia - Nystagmus - Postural tremor - Saccadic smooth pursuit - Slow progression - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar ataxia autosomal recessive 5. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the skin - Ankle clonus - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Babinski sign - Bowel incontinence - Cerebellar atrophy - Clonus - Congenital onset - Decreased body weight - Dilated fourth ventricle - Dystonia - Esotropia - Flexion contracture - Intellectual disability, progressive - Intellectual disability, severe - Microcephaly - Neurological speech impairment - Nonprogressive - Oculomotor apraxia - Optic atrophy - Short stature - Spasticity - Urinary incontinence - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar ataxia autosomal recessive 3. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Ataxia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Blindness - Cochlear degeneration - Hearing impairment - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia type 1 (ARCA1) is a condition characterized by progressive problems with movement due to a loss (atrophy) of nerve cells in the part of the brain that coordinates movement (the cerebellum). Signs and symptoms of the disorder first appear in early to mid-adulthood. People with this condition initially experience impaired speech (dysarthria), problems with coordination and balance (ataxia), or both. They may also have difficulty with movements that involve judging distance or scale (dysmetria). Other features of ARCA1 include abnormal eye movements (nystagmus) and problems following the movements of objects with the eyes. The movement problems are slowly progressive, often resulting in the need for a cane, walker, or wheelchair.
More than 100 people have been diagnosed with ARCA1. This condition was first discovered in individuals from the Beauce and Bas-Saint-Laurent regions of Quebec, Canada, but it has since been found in populations worldwide.
Mutations in the SYNE1 gene cause ARCA1. The SYNE1 gene provides instructions for making a protein called Syne-1 that is found in many tissues, but it seems to be especially critical in the brain. Within the brain, the Syne-1 protein appears to play a role in the maintenance of the cerebellum, which is the part of the brain that coordinates movement. The Syne-1 protein is active (expressed) in Purkinje cells, which are located in the cerebellum and are involved in chemical signaling between nerve cells (neurons).  SYNE1 gene mutations that cause ARCA1 result in an abnormally short, dysfunctional version of the Syne-1 protein. The defective protein is thought to impair Purkinje cell function and disrupt signaling between neurons in the cerebellum. The loss of brain cells in the cerebellum causes the movement problems characteristic of ARCA1, but it is unclear how this cell loss is related to impaired Purkinje cell function.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of ARCA1:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: SYNE1-Related Autosomal Recessive Cerebellar Ataxia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Spinocerebellar ataxia, autosomal recessive 8  - Johns Hopkins Medicine Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery: What is Ataxia?  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Dysarthria--Care   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care