Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome is a group of eye disorders that affects the development of the eye. Common eye symptoms include cornea defects, which is the clear covering on the front of the eye, and iris defects, which is the colored part of the eye. People with this syndrome may have an off-center pupil (corectopia) or extra holes in the eyes that can look like multiple pupils (polycoria). About 50% of people with this syndrome develop glaucoma, which is a serious condition that increases pressure inside of the eye. This may cause vision loss or blindness. Click here to view a diagram of the eye.  Even though Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome is primarily an eye disorder, this syndrome is also associated with symptoms that affect other parts of the body. Most people with this syndrome have distinctive facial features and many have issues with their teeth, including unusually small teeth (microdontia) or fewer than normal teeth (oligodontia). Some people have extra folds of skin around their belly button, heart defects, or other more rare birth defects. There are three types of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome and each has a different genetic cause. Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome type 1 is caused by spelling mistakes (mutations) in the PITX2 gene. Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome type 3 is caused by mutations in the FOXC1 gene. The gene that causes Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome type 2 is not known, but it is located on chromosome 13. Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome has an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome type 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the anterior chamber 90% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the iris 90% Posterior embryotoxon 90% Glaucoma 50% Hearing impairment 50% Malar flattening 50% Abnormality of the hypothalamus-pituitary axis 7.5% Cutis laxa 7.5% Depressed nasal bridge 7.5% Displacement of the external urethral meatus 7.5% Frontal bossing 7.5% Hypertelorism 7.5% Microdontia 7.5% Reduced number of teeth 7.5% Telecanthus 7.5% Urogenital fistula 7.5% Abnormality of the abdominal wall - Abnormally prominent line of Schwalbe - Anal atresia - Anal stenosis - Aniridia - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Growth hormone deficiency - Hypodontia - Hypoplasia of the iris - Hypoplasia of the maxilla - Hypospadias - Megalocornea - Microcornea - Polycoria - Prominent supraorbital ridges - Rieger anomaly - Short philtrum - Strabismus - Variable expressivity - Wide nasal bridge - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Genetic Testing Registry (GTR) is a central online resource for information about genetic tests. The intended audience for the GTR is health care providers and researchers. Patients and consumers with specific questions about a genetic test should contact a health care provider or a genetics professional. To view the clinical laboratories conducting testing click here.
 We were unable to find information in the medical literature regarding the management of dislocated lenses in patients with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome. We encourage you to speak with a healthcare provider experienced in the management of rare eye disorders. The American Association of Eye and Ear Centers of Excellence provides a list of member clinics and the Eye Research Network provides a list of eye research facilities that may be helpful as you search for clinics. Click on the links to view the lists. Please note that the lists are not exhaustive of all specialty and research eye clinics within the United States or abroad.
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome is a group of eye disorders that affects the development of the eye. Common eye symptoms include cornea defects, which is the clear covering on the front of the eye, and iris defects, which is the colored part of the eye. People with this syndrome may have an off-center pupil (corectopia) or extra holes in the eyes that can look like multiple pupils (polycoria). About 50% of people with this syndrome develop glaucoma, which is a serious condition that increases pressure inside of the eye. This may cause vision loss or blindness. Click here to view a diagram of the eye.  Even though Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome is primarily an eye disorder, this syndrome is also associated with symptoms that affect other parts of the body. Most people with this syndrome have distinctive facial features and many have issues with their teeth, including unusually small teeth (microdontia) or fewer than normal teeth (oligodontia). Some people have extra folds of skin around their belly button, heart defects, or other more rare birth defects. There are three types of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome and each has a different genetic cause. Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome type 1 is caused by spelling mistakes (mutations) in the PITX2 gene. Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome type 3 is caused by mutations in the FOXC1 gene. The gene that causes Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome type 2 is not known, but it is located on chromosome 13. Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome has an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome type 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the anterior chamber 90% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the iris 90% Posterior embryotoxon 90% Glaucoma 50% Hearing impairment 50% Malar flattening 50% Abnormality of the hypothalamus-pituitary axis 7.5% Cutis laxa 7.5% Depressed nasal bridge 7.5% Displacement of the external urethral meatus 7.5% Frontal bossing 7.5% Hypertelorism 7.5% Microdontia 7.5% Reduced number of teeth 7.5% Telecanthus 7.5% Urogenital fistula 7.5% Abnormality of cardiovascular system morphology - Anal stenosis - Anterior chamber synechiae - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Blindness - Cryptorchidism - Hydrocephalus - Hypodontia - Hypoplasia of the maxilla - Hypospadias - Inguinal hernia - Mandibular prognathia - Microcornea - Opacification of the corneal stroma - Short philtrum - Umbilical hernia - Wide nasal bridge - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome is primarily an eye disorder, although it can also affect other parts of the body. This condition is characterized by abnormalities of the front part of the eye, an area known as the anterior segment. For example, the colored part of the eye (the iris), may be thin or poorly developed. The iris normally has a single central hole, called the pupil, through which light enters the eye. People with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome often have a pupil that is off-center (corectopia) or extra holes in the iris that can look like multiple pupils (polycoria). This condition can also cause abnormalities of the cornea, which is the clear front covering of the eye.  About half of affected individuals develop glaucoma, a serious condition that increases pressure inside the eye. When glaucoma occurs with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome, it most often develops in late childhood or adolescence, although it can occur as early as infancy. Glaucoma can cause vision loss or blindness.  The signs and symptoms of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome can also affect other parts of the body. Many affected individuals have distinctive facial features such as widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism); a flattened mid-face with a broad, flat nasal bridge; and a prominent forehead. The condition is also associated with dental abnormalities including unusually small teeth (microdontia) or fewer than normal teeth (oligodontia). Some people with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome have extra folds of skin around their belly button (redundant periumbilical skin). Other, less common features can include heart defects, the opening of the urethra on the underside of the penis (hypospadias), narrowing of the anus (anal stenosis), and abnormalities of the pituitary gland that can result in slow growth.  Researchers have described at least three types of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome. The types, which are numbered 1 through 3, are distinguished by their genetic cause.
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome has an estimated prevalence of 1 in 200,000 people.
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome results from mutations in at least two known genes, PITX2 and FOXC1. PITX2 gene mutations cause type 1, and FOXC1 gene mutations cause type 3. The gene associated with type 2 is likely located on chromosome 13, but it has not been identified. The proteins produced from the PITX2 and FOXC1 genes are transcription factors, which means they attach (bind) to DNA and help control the activity of other genes. These transcription factors are active before birth in the developing eye and in other parts of the body. They appear to play important roles in embryonic development, particularly in the formation of structures in the anterior segment of the eye.  Mutations in either the PITX2 or FOXC1 gene disrupt the activity of other genes that are needed for normal development. Impaired regulation of these genes leads to problems in the formation of the anterior segment of the eye and other parts of the body. These developmental abnormalities underlie the characteristic features of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome. Affected individuals with PITX2 gene mutations are more likely than those with FOXC1 gene mutations to have abnormalities affecting parts of the body other than the eye.  Some people with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome do not have identified mutations in the PITX2 or FOXC1 genes. In these individuals, the cause of the condition is unknown. Other as-yet-unidentified genes may also cause Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome type 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome type 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome type 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Rieger syndrome  - Glaucoma Research Foundation: Care and Treatment   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care