Baller-Gerold syndrome is a rare condition characterized by the premature fusion of certain skull bones (craniosynostosis) and abnormalities of bones in the arms and hands, sometimes referred to as radial ray anomalies. Many cases of Baller-Gerold syndrome are caused by mutations in the RECQL4 gene. These cases are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. In a few reported cases, the characteristic features of Baller-Gerold syndrome have been associated with prenatal exposure to a drug called sodium valproate which is used to treat epilepsy and certain psychiatric disorders.  Treatment may include surgery for treatment of craniosynostosis or reconstruction of the index finger to functional thumb. The symptoms of Baller-Gerold syndrome overlap with features of Rothmund-Thomson syndrome and RAPADILINO syndrome which are also caused by the RECQL4 gene. Researchers are trying to determine if these conditions are separate disorders or part of a single syndrome with overlapping signs and symptoms.
The prevalence of Baller-Gerold syndrome is unknown, but this rare condition probably affects fewer than 1 per million people. Fewer than 40 cases have been reported in the medical literature.
Mutations in the RECQL4 gene cause some cases of Baller-Gerold syndrome. This gene provides instructions for making one member of a protein family called RecQ helicases. Helicases are enzymes that bind to DNA and temporarily unwind the two spiral strands (double helix) of the DNA molecule. This unwinding is necessary for copying (replicating) DNA in preparation for cell division, and for repairing damaged DNA. The RECQL4 protein helps stabilize genetic information in the body's cells and plays a role in replicating and repairing DNA.  Mutations in the RECQL4 gene prevent cells from producing any RECQL4 protein or change the way the protein is pieced together, which disrupts its usual function. A shortage of this protein may prevent normal DNA replication and repair, causing widespread damage to a person's genetic information over time. It is unclear how a loss of this protein's activity leads to the signs and symptoms of Baller-Gerold syndrome.  This condition has been associated with prenatal (before birth) exposure to a drug called sodium valproate. This medication is used to treat epilepsy and certain psychiatric disorders. Some infants whose mothers took sodium valproate during pregnancy were born with the characteristic features of Baller-Gerold syndrome, such as an unusual skull shape, distinctive facial features, and abnormalities of the arms and hands. However, it is unclear if exposure to the medication caused the condition.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Baller-Gerold syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Baller-Gerold Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Baller-Gerold syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Craniosynostosis  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Skull of a Newborn (image)   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care