The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Bartter syndrome antenatal type 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Hypomagnesemia 7.5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Chondrocalcinosis - Constipation - Dehydration - Diarrhea - Failure to thrive - Fetal polyuria - Fever - Frontal bossing - Generalized muscle weakness - Hyperactive renin-angiotensin system - Hyperaldosteronism - Hypercalciuria - Hyperchloridura - Hyperprostaglandinuria - Hypochloremia - Hypokalemia - Hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis - Hyposthenuria - Impaired platelet aggregation - Increased circulating renin level - Increased serum prostaglandin E2 - Increased urinary potassium - Intellectual disability - Large eyes - Low-to-normal blood pressure - Macrocephaly - Macrotia - Muscle cramps - Nephrocalcinosis - Osteopenia - Paresthesia - Polydipsia - Polyhydramnios - Polyuria - Premature birth - Prominent forehead - Renal juxtaglomerular cell hypertrophy/hyperplasia - Renal potassium wasting - Renal salt wasting - Seizures - Short stature - Small for gestational age - Tetany - Triangular face - Vomiting - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Bartter syndrome type 3. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Hypocalciuria 7.5% Abnormality of the choroid - Abnormality of the retinal vasculature - Abnormality of the sclera - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Dehydration - Generalized muscle weakness - Hyperactive renin-angiotensin system - Hyperaldosteronism - Hyperchloridura - Hypokalemia - Hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis - Hypotension - Impaired reabsorption of chloride - Increased circulating renin level - Increased urinary potassium - Polyuria - Renal potassium wasting - Renal salt wasting - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Bartter syndrome is a group of similar kidney disorders that cause an imbalance of potassium, sodium, chloride, and other molecules in the body. In some cases, the condition manifests before birth with increased amniotic fluid surrounding the affected fetus (polyhydramnios). Affected infants typically do not grow and gain wait as expected. Dehydration, constipation and increased urine production result from losing too much salt (sodium chloride) in the urine, and weakening of the bones can occur due to excess loss of calcium. Low levels of potassium in the blood (hypokalemia) can cause muscle weakness, cramping, and fatigue. It is caused by mutations in any one of at least 5 genes and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. The different types of Bartter syndrome are classified according to the specific gene that causes the condition. Treatment depends on the type of the syndrome present but chiefly focuses on preventing the loss of too much potassium from the body.
 Bartter syndrome may be caused by mutations in any one of several genes; the genetic cause in each case corresponds to the type of Bartter syndrome each affected individual has. Types I, II and IV typically result in the antenatal forms of Bartter syndrome (beginning before birth) while type III results in classical Bartter syndrome (usually beginning in early childhood). Type I results from mutations in the SLC12A1 gene; type II from mutations in the KCNJ1 gene; type III from mutations in the CLCNKB gene; and type IV from mutations in the BSND gene, or from a combination of mutations in the CLCNKA and CLCNKB genes. In some people with Bartter syndrome, the genetic cause of the disorder remains unknown; there may be other genes that cause the condition that have not yet been identified. All of these genes are essential for normal kidney function - they are involved in the kidneys' abilities to reabsorb salt. Abnormal changes in these genes impair these abilities, allowing for the loss of excess salt through the urine and also affecting the reabsorption of other things including potassium and calcium. The resulting imbalance of these in the body lead to the signs and symptoms of Bartter syndrome.
How  Bartter syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner, which means that both copies of the disease-causing gene (one inherited from each parent) have a mutation in an affected individual. Parents who each carry one mutated copy of the gene are referred to as carriers and typically do not have signs or symptoms of the condition. When two carriers for an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be a carrier like each of the parents, and a 25% chance to not have the condition and not be a carrier. Click here to visit the Genetic Home Reference Web site and view an illustration that demonstrates autosomal recessive inheritance.
 Bartter syndrome is usually diagnosed after a combination of tests are performed on an individual with the signs and symptoms of the condition. Blood test results in an affected individual typically show low blood potassium levels (with normal blood pressure); low blood chloride levels; and an acid/base balance that is skewed towards the base (i.e. the blood is more alkaline than usual). High levels of the hormones renin and aldosterone in the blood would also support the diagnosis. Urine test results that would support the diagnosis include high levels of potassium and chloride, suggesting that the kidneys have impaired ability to control the concentrations of these electrolytes. A positive genetic test result would confirm the diagnosis. Is genetic testing available for Bartter syndrome? Yes, genetic testing for Bartter syndrome is available. GeneTests lists the names of laboratories that are performing clinical genetic testing for Bartter syndrome. To view a list of the clinical laboratories performing testing for each type of Bartter syndrome, click on the appropriate link below: Antenatal Bartter syndrome type I Antenatal Bartter syndrome type II Bartter syndrome type III (Classical Bartter syndrome) Bartter syndrome type IVA (Infantile Bartter Syndrome with Sensorineural Deafness) Bartter syndrome type IVB Please note that most of the laboratories listed through GeneTests do not accept direct contact from patients and their families; therefore, individuals interested in learning more will need to work with a health care provider or a genetics professional.
 Treatment of Bartter syndrome depends on the type of the syndrome that the affected individual has, but it primarily focuses on preventing the loss of too much of potassium from the body. This may include oral potassium (K) supplements, medication such as indomethacin, and potassium-sparing diuretics. In high-stress situations such as illness or trauma, blood electrolyte levels can change rapidly, which may require immediate intravenous treatment. Genetic counseling may benefit affected individuals and their families. eMedicine has an article containing additional, thorough information about the management and treatment of Bartter syndrome. Click here to view this information.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Bartter syndrome antenatal type 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Chondrocalcinosis - Constipation - Dehydration - Diarrhea - Failure to thrive - Fetal polyuria - Fever - Generalized muscle weakness - Hyperactive renin-angiotensin system - Hyperaldosteronism - Hypercalciuria - Hyperchloridura - Hyperprostaglandinuria - Hypochloremia - Hypokalemia - Hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis - Hypomagnesemia - Hyposthenuria - Increased circulating renin level - Increased serum prostaglandin E2 - Increased urinary potassium - Intellectual disability - Low-to-normal blood pressure - Muscle cramps - Nephrocalcinosis - Osteopenia - Paresthesia - Polyhydramnios - Polyuria - Premature birth - Renal juxtaglomerular cell hypertrophy/hyperplasia - Renal potassium wasting - Renal salt wasting - Seizures - Short stature - Small for gestational age - Tetany - Vomiting - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The exact prevalence of this disorder is unknown, although it likely affects about 1 per million people worldwide. The condition appears to be more common in Costa Rica and Kuwait than in other populations.
Bartter syndrome can be caused by mutations in at least five genes. Mutations in the SLC12A1 gene cause type I. Type II results from mutations in the KCNJ1 gene. Mutations in the CLCNKB gene are responsible for type III. Type IV can result from mutations in the BSND gene or from a combination of mutations in the CLCNKA and CLCNKB genes.  The genes associated with Bartter syndrome play important roles in normal kidney function. The proteins produced from these genes are involved in the kidneys' reabsorption of salt. Mutations in any of the five genes impair the kidneys' ability to reabsorb salt, leading to the loss of excess salt in the urine (salt wasting). Abnormalities of salt transport also affect the reabsorption of other charged atoms (ions), including potassium and calcium. The resulting imbalance of ions in the body leads to the major features of Bartter syndrome.  In some people with Bartter syndrome, the genetic cause of the disorder is unknown. Researchers are searching for additional genes that may be associated with this condition.