The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Thin basement membrane nephropathy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Hematuria - Nonprogressive - Thin glomerular basement membrane - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Epithelial basement membrane corneal dystrophy is a condition where the epithelium of the cornea (the outermost region of the cornea) loses its normal clarity due to a buildup of cloudy material. It gets its name from the unusual appearance of the cornea during an eye exam. This dystrophy occurs when the epithelium's basement membrane develops abnormally, causing the epithelial cells to not properly adhere to it. This leads to recurrent epithelial erosions, which can cause blurred vision and severe pain. This condition is usually not inherited. However, families with autosomal dominant inheritance and mutations in the TGFBI gene have been identified.
 Because most people do not develop noticeable signs or symptoms, treatment usually is not necessary. However, if treatment is needed, doctors will try to control the pain associated with the epithelial erosions. They may patch the eye to immobilize it, or prescribe lubricating eye drops and ointments. With treatment, these erosions usually heal within three days, although periodic flashes of pain may occur for several weeks thereafter. Other treatments include anterior corneal punctures to allow better adherence of cells; corneal scraping to remove eroded areas of the cornea and allow regeneration of healthy epithelial tissue; and use of the excimer laser to remove surface irregularities. An article from eMedicine Journal provides additional information on treatment for epithelial basement membrane corneal dystrophy at the following link. You may need to register to view the article, but registration is free. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/1193945-treatment#showall