Congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens (CBAVD) occurs in males when the tubes that carry sperm out of the testes (vas deferens) fail to develop properly. Although the testes usually develop and function normally, sperm cannot be transported through the vas deferens to become part of semen. As a result, men with this condition are unable to father children (infertile) unless they use assisted reproductive technologies. This condition has not been reported to affect sex drive or sexual performance. This condition can occur alone or as a sign of cystic fibrosis, an inherited disease of the mucus glands. Many men with CBAVD do not have the other characteristic features of cystic fibrosis; however, some men with this condition may experience mild respiratory or digestive problems.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Azoospermia - Heterogeneous - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 More than half of all men with CBAVD have mutations in the CFTR gene. Mutations in this gene also cause cystic fibrosis. When CBAVD occurs with CFTR mutations, it is considered a form of atypical cystic fibrosis. In instances of CBAVD without a mutation in the CFTR gene, the cause of this condition is often unknown. Some cases are associated with other structural problems of the urinary tract.
When this condition is caused by mutations in the CFTR gene, it is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. This pattern of inheritance means that both copies of the gene in each cell have a mutation. Parents of a person with CBAVD each carry one CFTR mutation, but are usually unaffected (carriers). Men with CBAVD who choose to father children through assisted reproduction have an increased risk of having a child with cystic fibrosis. If congenital absence of the vas deferens is not caused by mutations in CFTR, the risk of having children with cystic fibrosis is not increased. The risk to siblings of a person with CBAVD depends on the affected person's CFTR gene mutation(s) and cannot readily be predicted without this information. Genetic testing is most informative when the CBAVD-causing mutations have been identified in the affected individual. Men with CBAVD sometimes have only one identifiable CFTR mutation, complicating the testing and interpretation of results in their family members. We recommend speaking with a genetics professional about risk to other family members as well as any appropriate genetic testing.
 GeneTests lists the names of laboratories that are performing genetic testing for CBAVD. To view the contact information for the clinical laboratories conducting testing, click here. Please note:  Most of the laboratories listed through GeneTests do not accept direct contact from patients and their families; therefore, if you are interested in learning more, you will need to work with a health care provider or a genetics professional.  Below, we have provided a list of online resources that can assist you in locating a genetics professional near you.
Congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens occurs in males when the tubes that carry sperm out of the testes (the vas deferens) fail to develop properly. Although the testes usually develop and function normally, sperm cannot be transported through the vas deferens to become part of semen. As a result, men with this condition are unable to father children (infertile) unless they use assisted reproductive technologies. This condition has not been reported to affect sex drive or sexual performance.  This condition can occur alone or as a sign of cystic fibrosis, an inherited disease of the mucus glands. Cystic fibrosis causes progressive damage to the respiratory system and chronic digestive system problems. Many men with congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens do not have the other characteristic features of cystic fibrosis; however, some men with this condition may experience mild respiratory or digestive problems.
This condition is responsible for 1 percent to 2 percent of all infertility in men.
Mutations in the CFTR gene cause congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens.  More than half of all men with this condition have mutations in the CFTR gene. Mutations in this gene also cause cystic fibrosis. When congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens occurs with CFTR mutations, it is considered a form of atypical cystic fibrosis.  The protein made from the CFTR gene forms a channel that transports negatively charged particles called chloride ions into and out of cells. The flow of chloride ions helps control the movement of water in tissues, which is necessary for the production of thin, freely flowing mucus. Mucus is a slippery substance that lubricates and protects the linings of the airways, digestive system, reproductive system, and other organs and tissues.  Mutations in the CFTR gene disrupt the function of the chloride channels, preventing them from regulating the flow of chloride ions and water across cell membranes. As a result, cells in the male genital tract produce mucus that is abnormally thick and sticky. This mucus clogs the vas deferens as they are forming, causing them to deteriorate before birth.  In instances of congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens without a mutation in the CFTR gene, the cause of this condition is often unknown. Some cases are associated with other structural problems of the urinary tract.
When this condition is caused by mutations in the CFTR gene, it is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. This pattern of inheritance means that both copies of the gene in each cell have a mutation. Men with this condition who choose to father children through assisted reproduction have an increased risk of having a child with cystic fibrosis. If congenital absence of the vas deferens is not caused by mutations in CFTR, the risk of having children with cystic fibrosis is not increased.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: CFTR-Related Disorders  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Infertility  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Pathway of sperm (image)  - MedlinePlus Health Topic: Assisted Reproductive Technology   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care