Binswanger's disease is a type of dementia caused by widespread, microscopic areas of damage to the deep layers of white matter in the brain. Most affected people experience progressive memory loss and deterioration of intellectual abilities (dementia); urinary urgency or incontinence; and an abnormally slow, unsteady gait (style of walking). While there is no cure, the progression of Binswanger's disease can be slowed with healthy lifestyle choices. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
 The signs and symptoms associated with Binswanger's disease generally disrupt tasks related to "executive cognitive functioning," including short-term memory, organization, mood, the regulation of attention, the ability to make decisions, and appropriate behavior. Binswanger's disease is primarily characterized by psychomotor slowness - an increase in the length of time it takes, for example, for the fingers to turn the thought of a letter into the shape of a letter on a piece of paper. Other symptoms include forgetfulness (but not as severe as the forgetfulness of Alzheimer disease); changes in speech; an unsteady gait; clumsiness or frequent falls; changes in personality or mood (most likely in the form of apathy, irritability, and depression); and urinary symptoms that aren't caused by urological disease.
 Binswanger's disease occurs when the blood vessels that supply the deep structures of the brain become obstructed (blocked). As the arteries become more and more narrowed, the blood supplied by those arteries decreases and brain tissue dies. This can be caused by atherosclerosis, thromboembolism (blood clots) and other diseases such as CADASIL. Risk factors for Binswanger's disease include: Hypertension Smoking Hypercholesterolemia Heart disease Diabetes mellitus
 Although Binswanger's disease is not considered an inherited condition, genetics may play a role in many of the conditions and risk factors that are associated with the disease (i.e. atherosclerosis, blood clots).
 A diagnosis of Binswanger's disease is often suspected based on the presence of characteristic signs and symptoms. Additional testing can then be ordered to confirm the diagnosis. This generally consists of imaging studies of the brain (i.e. CT scan and/or MRI scan).
 The brain damage associated with Binswanger's disease is not reversible. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person. For example, medications may be prescribed to treat depression, agitation, and other symptoms associated with the condition. Successful management of hypertension and diabetes can slow the progression of atherosclerosis, which can delay the progression of Binswanger's disease.
Binswanger's disease (BD), also called subcortical vascular dementia, is a type of dementia caused by widespread, microscopic areas of damage to the deep layers of white matter in the brain. The damage is the result of the thickening and narrowing (atherosclerosis) of arteries that feed the subcortical areas of the brain. Atherosclerosis (commonly known as "hardening of the arteries") is a systemic process that affects blood vessels throughout the body. It begins late in the fourth decade of life and increases in severity with age. As the arteries become more and more narrowed, the blood supplied by those arteries decreases and brain tissue dies. A characteristic pattern of BD-damaged brain tissue can be seen with modern brain imaging techniques such as CT scans or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The symptoms associated with BD are related to the disruption of subcortical neural circuits that control what neuroscientists call executive cognitive functioning: short-term memory, organization, mood, the regulation of attention, the ability to act or make decisions, and appropriate behavior. The most characteristic feature of BD is psychomotor slowness - an increase in the length of time it takes, for example, for the fingers to turn the thought of a letter into the shape of a letter on a piece of paper. Other symptoms include forgetfulness (but not as severe as the forgetfulness of Alzheimer's disease), changes in speech, an unsteady gait, clumsiness or frequent falls, changes in personality or mood (most likely in the form of apathy, irritability, and depression), and urinary symptoms that aren't caused by urological disease. Brain imaging, which reveals the characteristic brain lesions of BD, is essential for a positive diagnosis.
There is no specific course of treatment for BD. Treatment is symptomatic. People with depression or anxiety may require antidepressant medications such as the serotonin-specific reuptake inhibitors (SSRI) sertraline or citalopram. Atypical antipsychotic drugs, such as risperidone and olanzapine, can be useful in individuals with agitation and disruptive behavior. Recent drug trials with the drug memantine have shown improved cognition and stabilization of global functioning and behavior. The successful management of hypertension and diabetes can slow the progression of atherosclerosis, and subsequently slow the progress of BD. Because there is no cure, the best treatment is preventive, early in the adult years, by controlling risk factors such as hypertension, diabetes, and smoking.
BD is a progressive disease; there is no cure. Changes may be sudden or gradual and then progress in a stepwise manner. BD can often coexist with Alzheimer's disease. Behaviors that slow the progression of high blood pressure, diabetes, and atherosclerosis -- such as eating a healthy diet and keeping healthy wake/sleep schedules, exercising, and not smoking or drinking too much alcohol -- can also slow the progression of BD.
The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) conducts research related to BD in its laboratories at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and also supports additional research through grants to major medical institutions across the country. Much of this research focuses on finding better ways to prevent, treat, and ultimately cure neurological disorders, such as BD.