X-linked congenital stationary night blindness (XLCSNB) is a disorder of the retina. People with this condition typically experience night blindness and other vision problems, including loss of sharpness (reduced visual acuity), severe nearsightedness (myopia), nystagmus, and strabismus. Color vision is typically not affected. These vision problems are usually evident at birth, but tend to be stable (stationary) over time. There are two major types of XLCSNB: the complete form and the incomplete form. Both types have very similar signs and symptoms. However, everyone with the complete form has night blindness, while not all people with the incomplete form have night blindness. The types are distinguished by their genetic cause.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for X-linked congenital stationary night blindness. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Congenital stationary night blindness - Hemeralopia - Severe Myopia - X-linked recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Yes. About 45% of individuals with XLCSNB have the complete form, which is caused by mutations in the NYX gene. The other 55% have the incomplete form, which is caused by mutations in the CACNA1F gene. The Genetic Testing Registry (GTR) provides information about the genetic tests for this condition. The intended audience for the GTR is health care providers and researchers. Patients and consumers with specific questions about a genetic test should contact a health care provider or a genetics professional.
The prevalence of this condition is unknown. It appears to be more common in people of Dutch-German Mennonite descent. However, this disorder has been reported in families with many different ethnic backgrounds. The incomplete form is more common than the complete form.
Mutations in the NYX and CACNA1F genes cause the complete and incomplete forms of X-linked congenital stationary night blindness, respectively. The proteins produced from these genes play critical roles in the retina.  Within the retina, the NYX and CACNA1F proteins are located on the surface of light-detecting cells called photoreceptors. The retina contains two types of photoreceptor cells: rods and cones. Rods are needed for vision in low light. Cones are needed for vision in bright light, including color vision. The NYX and CACNA1F proteins ensure that visual signals are passed from rods and cones to other retinal cells called bipolar cells, which is an essential step in the transmission of visual information from the eyes to the brain.  Mutations in the NYX or CACNA1F gene disrupt the transmission of visual signals between photoreceptors and retinal bipolar cells, which impairs vision. In people with the complete form of X-linked congenital stationary night blindness (resulting from NYX mutations), the function of rods is severely disrupted, while the function of cones is only mildly affected. In people with the incomplete form of the condition (resulting from CACNA1F mutations), rods and cones are both affected, although they retain some ability to detect light.
This condition is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. The NYX and CACNA1F genes are located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.  In X-linked recessive inheritance, a female with one altered copy of the gene in each cell is called a carrier. Carriers of an NYX or CACNA1F mutation can pass on the mutated gene, but most do not develop any of the vision problems associated with X-linked congenital stationary night blindness. However, carriers may have retinal changes that can be detected with an electroretinogram.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of X-linked congenital stationary night blindness:  - American Optometric Association: Infant Vision  - Gene Review: Gene Review: X-Linked Congenital Stationary Night Blindness  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital stationary night blindness  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital stationary night blindness, type 1A  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital stationary night blindness, type 2A  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Electroretinography  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Eye movements - Uncontrollable  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Nearsightedness  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Strabismus  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Vision - Night Blindness   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Autosomal recessive congenital stationary night blindness is a disorder of the retina, which is the specialized tissue at the back of the eye that detects light and color. People with this condition typically have difficulty seeing and distinguishing objects in low light (night blindness). For example, they may not be able to identify road signs at night or see stars in the night sky. They also often have other vision problems, including loss of sharpness (reduced acuity), nearsightedness (myopia), involuntary movements of the eyes (nystagmus), and eyes that do not look in the same direction (strabismus).  The vision problems associated with this condition are congenital, which means they are present from birth. They tend to remain stable (stationary) over time.
Autosomal recessive congenital stationary night blindness is likely a rare disease; however, its prevalence is unknown.
Mutations in several genes can cause autosomal recessive congenital stationary night blindness. Each of these genes provide instructions for making proteins that are found in the retina. These proteins are involved in sending (transmitting) visual signals from cells called rods, which are specialized for vision in low light, to cells called bipolar cells, which relay the signals to other retinal cells. This signaling is an essential step in the transmission of visual information from the eyes to the brain.  Mutations in two genes, GRM6 and TRPM1, cause most cases of this condition. These genes provide instructions for making proteins that are necessary for bipolar cells to receive and relay signals. Mutations in other genes involved in the same bipolar cell signaling pathway are likely responsible for a small percentage of cases of autosomal recessive congenital stationary night blindness.  Gene mutations that cause autosomal recessive congenital stationary night blindness disrupt the transmission of visual signals between rod cells and bipolar cells or interfere with the bipolar cells' ability to pass on these signals. As a result, visual information received by rod cells cannot be effectively transmitted to the brain, leading to difficulty seeing in low light. The cause of the other vision problems associated with this condition is unclear. It has been suggested that the mechanisms that underlie night blindness can interfere with other visual systems, causing myopia, reduced visual acuity, and other impairments.  Some people with autosomal recessive congenital stationary night blindness have no identified mutation in any of the known genes. The cause of the disorder in these individuals is unknown.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of autosomal recessive congenital stationary night blindness:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital stationary night blindness, type 1B  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital stationary night blindness, type 1C  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital stationary night blindness, type 1D  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital stationary night blindness, type 1E  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital stationary night blindness, type 1F  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital stationary night blindness, type 2B   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Autosomal dominant congenital stationary night blindness is a disorder of the retina, which is the specialized tissue at the back of the eye that detects light and color. People with this condition typically have difficulty seeing and distinguishing objects in low light (night blindness). For example, they are not able to identify road signs at night and some people cannot see stars in the night sky. Affected individuals have normal daytime vision and typically do not have other vision problems related to this disorder.  The night blindness associated with this condition is congenital, which means it is present from birth. This vision impairment tends to remain stable (stationary); it does not worsen over time.
Autosomal dominant congenital stationary night blindness is likely a rare disease; however, its prevalence is unknown.
Mutations in the RHO, GNAT1, or PDE6B gene cause autosomal dominant congenital stationary night blindness. The proteins produced from these genes are necessary for normal vision, particularly in low-light conditions. These proteins are found in specialized light receptor cells in the retina called rods. Rods transmit visual signals from the eye to the brain when light is dim.  The RHO gene provides instructions for making a protein called rhodopsin, which is turned on (activated) by light entering the eye. Rhodopsin then attaches (binds) to and activates the protein produced from the GNAT1 gene, alpha ()-transducin. The -transducin protein then triggers the activation of a protein called cGMP-PDE, which is made up of multiple parts (subunits) including a subunit produced from the PDE6B gene. Activated cGMP-PDE triggers a series of chemical reactions that create electrical signals. These signals are transmitted from rod cells to the brain, where they are interpreted as vision.  Mutations in the RHO, GNAT1, or PDE6B gene disrupt the normal signaling that occurs within rod cells. As a result, the rods cannot effectively transmit signals to the brain, leading to a lack of visual perception in low light.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of autosomal dominant congenital stationary night blindness:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital stationary night blindness   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care