Blood pressure is the force of blood pushing against the walls of the blood vessels as the heart pumps blood. If your blood pressure rises and stays high over time, its called high blood pressure. High blood pressure is dangerous because it makes the heart work too hard, and the high force of the blood flow can harm arteries and organs such as the heart, kidneys, brain, and eyes.
High blood pressure is treated with lifestyle changes and medicines. Treatment can help control blood pressure, but it will not cure high blood pressure, even if your blood pressure readings appear normal. If you stop treatment, your blood pressure and risk for related health problems will rise. For a healthy future, follow your treatment plan closely. Work with your health care team for lifelong blood pressure control.
Two key measures are used to determine if someone is overweight or obese. These are body mass index, or BMI, and waist circumference. Body mass index (BMI) is a measure of weight in relation to height, and provides an estimate of your total body fat. As your BMI goes up, so do your chances of getting high blood pressure, heart disease, and other health problems. A BMI -  below 18.5 is a sign that you are underweight.  - between 18.5 and 24.9 is in the healthy range.  - between 25 and 29.9 is considered overweight.  - of 30 or more is considered obese.  below 18.5 is a sign that you are underweight. between 18.5 and 24.9 is in the healthy range. between 25 and 29.9 is considered overweight. of 30 or more is considered obese. See the Body Mass Index Table, available from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI). Body mass index (BMI) applies to both men and women, but it does have some limits. - It may overestimate body fat in in someone who is very muscular or who has swelling from fluid retention (called edema)  - It may underestimate body fat in older persons and others who have lost muscle mass. It may overestimate body fat in in someone who is very muscular or who has swelling from fluid retention (called edema) It may underestimate body fat in older persons and others who have lost muscle mass. Thats why waist measurement is often checked as well. Another reason is that too much body fat in the stomach area also increases disease risk. A waist measurement of more than 35 inches in women and more than 40 inches in men is considered high.
Cholesterol is a waxy, fat-like substance that your liver makes. It is also found in some foods that come from animals.
The recommended blood test for checking your cholesterol levels is called a fasting lipoprotein profile. It will show your - total cholesterol  - low-density lipoprotein (LDL), or bad cholesterol -- the main source of cholesterol buildup and blockage in the arteries  - high-density lipoprotein (HDL), or good cholesterol that helps keep cholesterol from building up in your arteries  - triglycerides -- another form of fat in your blood. total cholesterol low-density lipoprotein (LDL), or bad cholesterol -- the main source of cholesterol buildup and blockage in the arteries high-density lipoprotein (HDL), or good cholesterol that helps keep cholesterol from building up in your arteries triglycerides -- another form of fat in your blood. You should not eat or drink anything except water and black coffee for 9 to 12 hours before taking the test. If you can't have a lipoprotein profile done, a different blood test will tell you your total cholesterol and HDL (good) cholesterol levels. You do not have to fast before this test. If this test shows that your total cholesterol is 200 mg/dL or higher, or that your HDL (good) cholesterol is less than 40 mg/dL, you will need to have a lipoprotein profile done.
The main goal of cholesterol-lowering treatment is to lower your LDL (bad) cholesterol level enough to reduce your risk of having a heart attack or diseases caused by narrowing of the arteries.
If you are pregnant, high blood pressure can cause problems for you and your unborn baby. You may have had high blood pressure before you got pregnant. Or you may get it once you are pregnant - a condition called gestational hypertension. Either one can cause low birth weight or premature delivery of the baby.    Controlling your blood pressure during pregnancy and getting regular prenatal care are important for the health of you and your baby. Treatments for high blood pressure in pregnancy may include close monitoring of the baby, lifestyle changes, and certain medicines.    Some pregnant women with high blood pressure develop preeclampsia. It's a sudden increase in blood pressure after the 20th week of pregnancy. It can be life-threatening for both you and the unborn baby. There is no proven way to prevent it. Most women who have signs of preeclampsia are closely monitored to lessen or avoid complications. The only way to "cure" preeclampsia is to deliver the baby.    NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
You've probably heard that high blood pressure is a problem. Sometimes blood pressure that is too low can also cause problems.    Blood pressure is the force of your blood pushing against the walls of your arteries. Each time your heart beats, it pumps out blood into the arteries. Your blood pressure is highest when your heart beats, pumping the blood. This is called systolic pressure. When your heart is at rest, between beats, your blood pressure falls. This is the diastolic pressure. Your blood pressure reading uses these two numbers. Usually they're written one above or before the other, such as 120/80. If your blood pressure reading is 90/60 or lower, you have low blood pressure.     Some people have low blood pressure all the time. They have no symptoms and their low readings are normal for them. In other people, blood pressure drops below normal because of a medical condition or certain medicines. Some people may have symptoms of low blood pressure when standing up too quickly. Low blood pressure is a problem only if it causes dizziness, fainting or in extreme cases, shock.     NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
Anyone can develop high blood pressure; however, age, race or ethnicity, being overweight, gender, lifestyle habits, and a family history of high blood pressure can increase your risk for developing high blood pressure.
                
Age
                
Blood pressure tends to rise with age. About 65 percent of Americans age 60 or older have high blood pressure. However, the risk for prehypertension and high blood pressure is increasing for children and teens, possibly due to the rise in the number of overweight children and teens.
                
Race/Ethnicity
                
High blood pressure is more common in African American adults than in Caucasian or Hispanic American adults. Compared with these ethnic groups, African Americans:
                
Tend to get high blood pressure earlier in life.
                
Often, on average, have higher blood pressure numbers.
                
Are less likely to achieve target blood pressure goals with treatment.
                
Overweight
                
You are more likely to develop prehypertension or high blood pressure if youre overweight or obese. The terms overweight and obese refer to body weight thats greater than what is considered healthy for a certain height.
                
Gender
                
Before age 55, men are more likely than women to develop high blood pressure. After age 55, women are more likely than men to develop high blood pressure.
                
Lifestyle Habits
                
Unhealthy lifestyle habits can raise your risk for high blood pressure, and they include:
                
Eating too much sodium or too little potassium
                
Lack of physical activity
                
Drinking too much alcohol
                
Stress
                
Family History
                
A family history of high blood pressure raises the risk of developing prehypertension or high blood pressure. Some people have a high sensitivity to sodium and salt, which may increase their risk for high blood pressure and may run in families. Genetic causes of this condition are why family history is a risk factor for this condition.
Because diagnosis is based on blood pressure readings, this condition can go undetected for years, as symptoms do not usually appear until the body is damaged from chronic high blood pressure.
                

                
Complications of High Blood Pressure
                
When blood pressure stays high over time, it can damage the body and cause complications. Some common complications and their signs and symptoms include:
                
Aneurysms:When an abnormal bulge forms in the wall of an artery. Aneurysms develop and grow for years without causing signs or symptoms until they rupture, grow large enough to press on nearby body parts, or block blood flow. The signs and symptoms that develop depend on the location of the aneurysm.
                
Chronic Kidney Disease: When blood vessels narrow in the kidneys, possibly causing kidney failure.
                
Cognitive Changes: Research shows that over time, higher blood pressure numbers can lead to cognitive changes. Signs and symptoms include memory loss, difficulty finding words, and losing focus during conversations.
                
Eye Damage: When blood vessels in the eyes burst or bleed. Signs and symptoms include vision changes or blindness.
                
Heart Attack: When the flow of oxygen-rich blood to a section of heart muscle suddenly becomes blocked and the heart doesnt get oxygen. The most common warning symptoms of a heart attack are chest pain or discomfort, upper body discomfort, and shortness of breath.
                
Heart Failure: When the heart cant pump enough blood to meet the bodys needs. Common signs and symptoms of heart failure include shortness of breath or trouble breathing; feeling tired; and swelling in the ankles, feet, legs, abdomen, and veins in the neck.
                
Peripheral Artery Disease: A disease in which plaque builds up in leg arteries and affects blood flow in the legs. When people have symptoms, the most common are pain, cramping, numbness, aching, or heaviness in the legs, feet, and buttocks after walking or climbing stairs.
                
Stroke: When the flow of oxygen-rich blood to a portion of the brain is blocked. The symptoms of a stroke include sudden onset of weakness; paralysis or numbness of the face, arms, or legs; trouble speaking or understanding speech; and trouble seeing.
For most patients, health care providers diagnose high blood pressure when blood pressure readings areconsistently 140/90 mmHg or above.
                
Confirming High Blood Pressure
                
A blood pressure test is easy and painless and can be done in a health care providers office or clinic. To prepare for the test:
                
Dont drink coffee or smoke cigarettes for 30 minutes prior to the test.
                
Go to the bathroom before the test.
                
Sit for 5 minutes before the test.
                
To track blood pressure readings over a period of time, the health care provider may ask you to come into the office on different days and at different times to take your blood pressure. The health care provider also may ask you to check readings at home or at other locations that have blood pressure equipment and to keep a written log of all your results.
                
Whenever you have an appointment with the health care provider, be sure to bring your log of blood pressure readings. Every time you visit the health care provider, he or she should tell you what your blood pressure numbers are; if he or she does not, you should ask for your readings.
                
Blood Pressure Severity and Type
                
Your health care provider usually takes 23 readings at several medical appointments to diagnose high blood pressure. Using the results of your blood pressure test, your health care provider will diagnose prehypertension or high blood pressure if:
                
Your systolic or diastolic readings are consistently higher than 120/80 mmHg.
                
Your childs blood pressure numbers are outside average numbers for children of the same age, gender, and height.
                
Once your health care provider determines the severity of your blood pressure, he or she can order additional tests to determine if your blood pressure is due to other conditions or medicines or if you have primary high blood pressure. Health care providers can use this information to develop your treatment plan.
                
Some people have white coat hypertension. This happens when blood pressure readings are only high when taken in a health care providers office compared with readings taken in any other location. Health care providers diagnose this type of high blood pressure by reviewing readings in the office and readings taken anywhere else. Researchers believe stress, which can occur during the medical appointment, causes white coat hypertension.
Many factors can affect the cholesterol levels in your blood. You can control some factors, but not others.
                
Factors You Can Control
                
Diet
                
Cholesterol is found in foods that come from animal sources, such as egg yolks, meat, and cheese. Some foods have fats that raise your cholesterol level.
                
For example, saturated fat raises your low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol level more than anything else in your diet. Saturated fat is found in some meats, dairy products, chocolate, baked goods, and deep-fried and processed foods.
                
Trans fatty acids (trans fats) raise your LDL cholesterol and lower your high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol. Trans fats are made when hydrogen is added to vegetable oil to harden it. Trans fats are found in some fried and processed foods.
                
Limiting foods with cholesterol, saturated fat, and trans fats can help you control your cholesterol levels.
                
Physical Activity and Weight
                
Lack of physical activity can lead to weight gain. Being overweight tends to raise your LDL level, lower your HDL level, and increase your total cholesterol level. (Total cholesterol is a measure of the total amount of cholesterol in your blood, including LDL and HDL.)
                
Routine physical activity can help you lose weight and lower your LDL cholesterol. Being physically active also can help you raise your HDL cholesterol level.
                
Factors You Cant Control
                
Heredity
                
High blood cholesterol can run in families. An inherited condition called familial hypercholesterolemia causes very high LDL cholesterol. (Inherited means the condition is passed from parents to children through genes.) This condition begins at birth, and it may cause a heart attack at an early age.
                
Age and Sex
                
Starting at puberty, men often have lower levels of HDL cholesterol than women. As women and men age, their LDL cholesterol levels often rise. Before age 55, women usually have lower LDL cholesterol levels than men. However, afterage 55, women can have higher LDL levels than men.
High blood cholesterol usually has no signs or symptoms. Thus, many people don't know that their cholesterol levels are too high.
                
If you're 20 years old or older, have your cholesterol levels checked at least once every 5 years. Talk with your doctor about how often you should be tested.
Blood pressure is the force of blood pushing against blood vessel walls as the heart pumps out blood, and high blood pressure, also called hypertension, is an increase in the amount of force that blood places on blood vessels as it moves through the body. Factors that can increase this force include higher blood volume due to extra fluid in the blood and blood vessels that are narrow, stiff, or clogged.
                
Blood pressure test results are written with two numbers separated by a slash. For example, a health care provider will write a blood pressure result as 120/80. A health care provider will say this blood pressure result as 120 over 80. The top number is called the systolic pressure and represents the pressure as the heart beats and pushes blood through the blood vessels. The bottom number is called the diastolic pressure and represents the pressure as blood vessels relax between heartbeats.
                
Most people without chronic health conditions have a normal blood pressure if it stays below 120/80. Prehypertension is a systolic pressure of 120 to 139 or a diastolic pressure of 80 to 89. High blood pressure is a systolic pressure of 140 or above or a diastolic pressure of 90 or above.1
                
People should talk with their health care provider about their individual blood pressure goals and how often they should have their blood pressure checked.
Most people with high blood pressure do not have symptoms. In rare cases, high blood pressure can cause headaches.
                
Kidney disease also does not have symptoms in the early stages. A person may have swelling called edema, which happens when the kidneys cannot get rid of extra fluid and salt. Edema can occur in the legs, feet, or ankles and less often in the hands or face. Once kidney function decreases further, symptoms can include
                
- appetite loss  - nausea  - vomiting  - drowsiness or feeling tired  - trouble concentrating  - sleep problems  - increased or decreased urination  - generalized itching or numbness  - dry skin  - headaches  - weight loss  - darkened skin  - muscle cramps  - shortness of breath  - chest pain
The best way to slow or prevent kidney disease from high blood pressure is to take steps to lower blood pressure. These steps include a combination of medication and lifestyle changes, such as
                
- healthy eating  - physical activity  - maintaining a healthy weight  - quitting smoking  - managing stress
                
No matter what the cause of the kidney disease, high blood pressure can increase damage to the kidneys. People with kidney disease should keep their blood pressure below 140/90.4
                
Medication
                
Medications that lower blood pressure can also significantly slow the progression of kidney disease. Two types of blood pressure-lowering medications, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), have been shown effective in slowing the progression of kidney disease. Many people require two or more medications to control their blood pressure. In addition to an ACE inhibitor or an ARB, a health care provider may prescribe a diuretica medication that helps the kidneys remove fluid from the blood. A person may also need beta blockers, calcium channel blockers, and other blood pressure medications.
- Blood pressure is the force of blood pushing against blood vessel walls as the heart pumps out blood, and high blood pressure, also called hypertension, is an increase in the amount of force that blood places on blood vessels as it moves through the body.  - High blood pressure can damage blood vessels in the kidneys, reducing their ability to work properly. When the force of blood flow is high, blood vessels stretch so blood flows more easily. Eventually, this stretching scars and weakens blood vessels throughout the body, including those in the kidneys.  - High blood pressure is the second leading cause of kidney failure in the United States after diabetes.  - A health care provider diagnoses high blood pressure when multiple blood pressure testsoften repeated over several visits to a health care providers officeshow that a systolic blood pressure is consistently above 140 or a diastolic blood pressure is consistently above 90.  - Kidney disease is diagnosed with urine and blood tests.  - The best way to slow or prevent kidney damage from high blood pressure is to take steps to lower blood pressure. These steps include a combination of medication and lifestyle changes, such as      - healthy eating    - physical activity    - maintaining a healthy weight    - quitting smoking    - managing stress    - No matter what the cause of the kidney disease, high blood pressure can increase damage to the kidneys. People with kidney disease should keep their blood pressure below 140/90.