Bone marrow is the spongy tissue inside some of your bones, such as your hip and thigh bones. It contains stem cells. The stem cells can develop into the red blood cells that carry oxygen through your body, the white blood cells that fight infections, and the platelets that help with blood clotting.    With bone marrow disease, there are problems with the stem cells or how they develop:       - In leukemia, a cancer of the blood, the bone marrow makes abnormal white blood cells    - In aplastic anemia, the bone marrow doesn't make red blood cells    - In myeloproliferative disorders, the bone marrow makes too many white blood cells    - Other diseases, such as lymphoma, can spread into the bone marrow and affect the production of blood cells       Causes of bone marrow diseases include genetics and environmental factors. Tests for bone marrow diseases include blood and bone marrow tests. Treatments depend on the disorder and how severe it is. They might involve medicines, blood transfusions or a bone marrow transplant.
Your bones help you move, give you shape and support your body. They are living tissues that rebuild constantly throughout your life. During childhood and your teens, your body adds new bone faster than it removes old bone. After about age 20, you can lose bone faster than you make bone. To have strong bones when you are young, and to prevent bone loss when you are older, you need to get enough calcium, vitamin D, and exercise. You should also avoid smoking and drinking too much alcohol.    Bone diseases can make bones easy to break. Different kinds of bone problems include       - Low bone density and osteoporosis, which make your bones weak and more likely to break     - Osteogenesis imperfecta makes your bones brittle     - Paget's disease of bone makes them weak     - Bones can also develop cancer and infections    -  Other bone diseases, which are caused by poor nutrition, genetics, or problems with the rate of bone growth or rebuilding       NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases