Mineral and bone disorder in CKD occurs when damaged kidneys and abnormal hormone levels cause calcium and phosphorus levels in a persons blood to be out of balance. Mineral and bone disorder commonly occurs in people with CKD and affects most people with kidney failure receiving dialysis.
                
In the past, health care providers used the term renal osteodystrophy to describe mineral and hormone disturbances caused by kidney disease. Today, renal osteodystrophy only describes bone problems that result from mineral and bone disorder in CKD. Health care providers might use the phrase chronic kidney disease mineral and bone disorder, or CKD-MBD, to describe the condition that affects the bones, heart, and blood vessels.
Chronic kidney disease causes mineral and bone disorder because the kidneys do not properly balance the mineral levels in the body. The kidneys
                
- stop activating calcitriol. The low levels of calcitriol in the body create an imbalance of calcium in the blood.  - do not remove the phosphorus in the blood properly, so phosphorus levels rise in the blood. The extra phosphorus pulls calcium out of the bones, causing them to weaken.
                
Another factor contributes to the cause of mineral and bone disorder. When the kidneys are damaged, the parathyroid gland releases parathyroid hormone into the blood to pull calcium from the bones and raise blood calcium levels. This response restores the balance of phosphorus and calcium; however, it also starves the bones of much-needed calcium.
In adults, symptoms of mineral and bone disorder in CKD may not appear until bone changes have taken place for many years. For this reason, people often refer to the disease as a silent crippler. Eventually, a person with the condition may begin to feel bone and joint pain.
                

                
Mineral and Bone Disorder in Children with Chronic Kidney Disease   Mineral and bone disorder in CKD is most serious when it occurs in children because their bones are still developing and growing. Growing children can show symptoms of mineral and bone disorder even in the early stages of CKD. Slowed bone growth leads to short stature, which may remain with a child into adulthood. One deformity caused by mineral and bone disorder in CKD occurs when the legs bend inward or outward, a condition often referred to as "renal rickets." More information is provided in the NIDDK health topic, Growth Failure in Children with Kidney Disease. Find more about childrens bone health on the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development website at www.nichd.nih.gov.
The complications of mineral and bone disorder in CKD include slowed bone growth and deformities, and heart and blood vessel problems.
                
Slowed Bone Growth and Deformities
                
Damaged kidneys must work harder to clear phosphorus from the body. High levels of phosphorus cause lower levels of calcium in the blood, resulting in the following series of events:
                
- When a persons blood calcium level becomes too low, the parathyroid glands release parathyroid hormone.  - Parathyroid hormone removes calcium from bones and places it into the blood, raising a persons blood calcium level at the risk of harming bones.  - A low calcitriol level also leads to an increased level of parathyroid hormone.
                
If mineral and bone disorder in CKD remains untreated in adults, bones gradually become thin and weak, and a person with the condition may begin to feel bone and joint pain. Mineral and bone disorder in CKD also increases a persons risk of bone fractures.
                
Heart and Blood Vessel Problems
                
In addition to harming bones, mineral and bone disorder in CKD can cause problems in the heart and blood vessels:
                
- High levels of blood calcium can damage blood vessels and lead to heart problems.  - High phosphorus levels also can cause blood vessels to become like bone, leading to hardening of the arteries.  - High phosphorus levels also cause abnormal hormone regulation, even if the calcium level is acceptable.
                
Parathyroid hormone and another hormone made in the bones called FGF23 can also affect bone and heart health, leading to the following series of problems:
                
- When parathyroid hormone or FGF23 levels are high, a person can have heart problems.   - The complex hormone abnormalities that cause bone deformities can also harm a persons heart and blood vessels.
- Mineral and bone disorder in chronic kidney disease (CKD) occurs when damaged kidneys and abnormal hormone levels cause calcium and phosphorus levels in a persons blood to be out of balance. Mineral and bone disorder commonly occurs in people with CKD and affects most people with kidney failure receiving dialysis.  - Chronic kidney disease is kidney damage that occurs slowly over many years, often due to diabetes or high blood pressure. Once damaged, the kidneys cant filter blood as they should.  - Hormones and minerals are important because they help bones stay strong. If a persons hormones and minerals are out of balance, his or her bones can become weak and malformed.   - Parathyroid hormone plays an important role in controlling calcium levels in the blood. When kidneys do not function properly, extra parathyroid hormone is released in the blood to move calcium from inside the bones into the blood.  - Chronic kidney disease causes mineral and bone disorder because the kidneys do not properly balance the mineral levels in the body. The kidneys stop activating calcitriol and do not remove the phosphorus in the blood properly.  - The complications of mineral and bone disorder in CKD include slowed bone growth and deformities, and heart and blood vessel problems.   - Treating mineral and bone disorder in CKD includes preventing damage to bones by controlling parathyroid hormone levels through changes in eating, diet, and nutrition; medications and supplements; and dialysis.   - Reducing dietary intake of phosphorus is one of the most important steps in preventing bone disease.  - If diet, medications, and dialysis cant control parathyroid hormone levels, a surgeon can remove one or more of the parathyroid glands.