Book syndrome is a very rare type of ectodermal dysplasia. Signs and symptoms include premolar aplasia (when the premolars fail to develop); excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis); and premature graying of the hair. Other features that have been reported in only one person include a narrow palate (roof of the mouth); hypoplastic (underdeveloped) nails; eyebrow anomalies; a unilateral simian crease; and poorly formed dermatoglyphics (skin patterns on the hands and feet). Book syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.
How  To our knowledge, Book syndrome has only been reported in one, large Swedish family (25 cases in 4 generations) and in one other isolated case. In the Swedish family, the syndrome was inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. In autosomal dominant inheritance, having a mutation in only one copy of the responsible gene is enough to cause signs and symptoms of the condition. When a person with an autosomal dominant condition has children, each child has a 50% (1 in 2) risk to inherit the mutated copy of the gene.
 Due to the rarity of Book syndrome and scarcity of reports in the medical literature, we are unaware of specific information about diagnosing Book syndrome. In general, ectodermal dysplasias are diagnosed by the presence of specific symptoms affecting the hair, nails, sweat glands, and/or teeth. When a person has at least two types of abnormal ectodermal features (e.g., malformed teeth and extremely sparse hair), the person is typically identified as being affected by an ectodermal dysplasia. Specific genetics tests to diagnose ectodermal dysplasia are available for only a limited number of ectodermal dysplasias. Unfortunately, there currently is no genetic test for Book syndrome because the gene responsible for the condition has not yet been identified. People who are interested in learning more about a diagnosis of ectodermal dysplasia for themselves or family members should speak with their dermatologist and/or dentist. These specialists can help determine whether a person has signs and/or symptoms of ectodermal dysplasia.