There are many treatment options for women with breast cancer. The choice of treatment depends on your age and general health, the stage of the cancer, whether or not it has spread beyond the breast, and other factors. If tests show that you have cancer, you should talk with your doctor and make treatment decisions as soon as possible. Studies show that early treatment leads to better outcomes. Working With a Team of Specialists People with cancer often are treated by a team of specialists. The team will keep the primary doctor informed about the patient's progress. The team may include a medical oncologist who is a specialist in cancer treatment, a surgeon, a radiation oncologist who is a specialist in radiation therapy, and others. Before starting treatment, you may want another doctor to review the diagnosis and treatment plan. Some insurance companies require a second opinion. Others may pay for a second opinion if you request it. (Watch the video about this breast cancer survivor's treatment. To enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. To reduce the video, press the Escape (Esc) button on your keyboard.) Clinical Trials for Breast Cancer Some breast cancer patients take part in studies of new treatments. These studies, called clinical trials, are designed to find out whether a new treatment is both safe and effective. Often, clinical trials compare a new treatment with a standard one so that doctors can learn which is more effective. Women with breast cancer who are interested in taking part in a clinical trial should talk to their doctor. The U.S. National Institutes of Health, through its National Library of Medicine and other Institutes, maintains a database of clinical trials at ClinicalTrials.gov. See a list of the current clinical trials on breast cancer.
The body is made up of many types of cells. Normally, cells grow, divide, and produce more cells as needed to keep the body healthy. Sometimes, however, the process goes wrong. Cells become abnormal and form more cells in an uncontrolled way. These extra cells form a mass of tissue, called a growth or tumor. Tumors can be benign, which means not cancerous, or malignant, which means cancerous.
 Breast cancer is one of the most common cancers in American women. It is most common among women between the ages of 45-85. Today, more women are surviving breast cancer than ever before. Over two million women are breast cancer survivors. (Watch the video to learn more about breast cancer survival rates. To enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. To reduce the video, press the Escape (Esc) button on your keyboard.) Men can get breast cancer too, although they account for only one percent of all reported cases. Read more about breast cancer in men.
When breast cancer first develops, there may be no symptoms at all. But as the cancer grows, it can cause changes that women should watch for. You can help safeguard your health by learning the following warning signs of breast cancer. -  a lump or thickening in or near the breast or in the underarm area  - a change in the size or shape of the breast  - a dimple or puckering in the skin of the breast  -  a nipple turned inward into the breast  -  fluid, other than breast milk, from the nipple, especially if it's bloody  - scaly, red, or swollen skin on the breast, nipple, or areola (the dark area of skin around the nipple)  - dimples in the breast that look like the skin of an orange. a lump or thickening in or near the breast or in the underarm area a change in the size or shape of the breast a dimple or puckering in the skin of the breast a nipple turned inward into the breast fluid, other than breast milk, from the nipple, especially if it's bloody scaly, red, or swollen skin on the breast, nipple, or areola (the dark area of skin around the nipple) dimples in the breast that look like the skin of an orange. Don't Ignore Symptoms You should see your doctor about any symptoms like these. Most often, they are not cancer, but it's important to check with the doctor so that any problems can be diagnosed and treated as early as possible. Some women believe that as they age, health problems are due to "growing older." Because of this myth, many illnesses go undiagnosed and untreated. Don't ignore your symptoms because you think they are not important or because you believe they are normal for your age. Talk to your doctor.
When studying ways to prevent breast cancer, scientists look at risk factors and protective factors. Anything that increases your chance of developing cancer is called a cancer risk factor. Anything that decreases your chance of developing cancer is called a cancer protective factor. Some risk factors for cancer can be avoided, but many cannot. For example, both smoking and inheriting certain genes are risk factors for some types of cancer, but only smoking can be avoided. Regular exercise and a healthy diet may be protective factors for some types of cancer. Avoiding risk factors and increasing protective factors may lower your risk but it does not mean that you will not get cancer. Different ways to prevent cancer are being studied, including - changing lifestyle or eating habits  - avoiding things known to cause cancer  - taking medicine to treat a precancerous condition or to keep cancer from starting. changing lifestyle or eating habits avoiding things known to cause cancer taking medicine to treat a precancerous condition or to keep cancer from starting.
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options.The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following:         - The stage of the cancer (the size of the tumor and whether it is in the breast only or has spread to other parts of the body).    - The type of breast cancer.    - The age of the unborn baby.    - Whether there are signs or symptoms.    - The patients general health.
Breast cancer is sometimes caused by inherited gene mutations (changes). The genes in cells carry the hereditary information that is received from a persons parents. Hereditary breast cancer makes up about 5% to 10% of all breast cancer. Some mutated genes related to breast cancer are more common in certain ethnic groups.   Women who have certain gene mutations, such as a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation, have an increased risk of breast cancer. These women also have an increased risk of ovarian cancer, and may have an increased risk of other cancers. Men who have a mutated gene related to breast cancer also have an increased risk of breast cancer. For more information, see the PDQ summary on Male Breast Cancer Treatment.   There are tests that can detect (find) mutated genes. These genetic tests are sometimes done for members of families with a high risk of cancer. See the PDQ summary on Genetics of Breast and Gynecologic Cancers for more information.
Key Points
                    - Male breast cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the breast.    - Radiation exposure, high levels of estrogen, and a family history of breast cancer can increase a mans risk of breast cancer.     - Male breast cancer is sometimes caused by inherited gene mutations (changes).    - Men with breast cancer usually have lumps that can be felt.     - Tests that examine the breasts are used to detect (find) and diagnose breast cancer in men.    - If cancer is found, tests are done to study the cancer cells.    - Survival for men with breast cancer is similar to survival for women with breast cancer.    - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options.
                
                
                    Male breast cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the breast.
                    Breast cancer may occur in men. Men at any age may develop breast cancer, but it is usually detected (found) in men between 60 and 70 years of age. Male breast cancer makes up less than 1% of all cases of breast cancer.   The following types of breast cancer are found in men:         -  Infiltrating ductal carcinoma: Cancer that has spread beyond the cells lining ducts in the breast. Most men with breast cancer have this type of cancer.    -  Ductal carcinoma in situ: Abnormal cells that are found in the lining of a duct; also called intraductal carcinoma.    -  Inflammatory breast cancer: A type of cancer in which the breast looks red and swollen and feels warm.     -  Paget disease of the nipple: A tumor that has grown from ducts beneath the nipple onto the surface of the nipple.          Lobular carcinoma in situ (abnormal cells found in one of the lobes or sections of the breast), which sometimes occurs in women, has not been seen in men.
                
                
                    Men with breast cancer usually have lumps that can be felt.
                    Lumps and other signs may be caused by male breast cancer or by other conditions. Check with your doctor if you notice a change in your breasts.
Radiation exposure, high levels of estrogen, and a family history of breast cancer can increase a mans risk of breast cancer. Anything that increases your risk of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesnt mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your doctor if you think you may be at risk. Risk factors for breast cancer in men may include the following:         - Being exposed to radiation.     - Having a disease linked to high levels of estrogen in the body, such as cirrhosis (liver disease) or Klinefelter syndrome (a genetic disorder.)    - Having several female relatives who have had breast cancer, especially relatives who have an alteration of the BRCA2 gene.
Male breast cancer is sometimes caused by inherited gene mutations (changes).The genes in cells carry the hereditary information that is received from a persons parents. Hereditary breast cancer makes up about 5% to 10% of all breast cancer. Some mutated genes related to breast cancer are more common in certain ethnic groups. Men who have a mutated gene related to breast cancer have an increased risk of this disease.    There are tests that can detect (find) mutated genes. These genetic tests are sometimes done for members of families with a high risk of cancer. See the following PDQ summaries for more information:         -  Genetics of Breast and Gynecologic Cancers     -  Breast Cancer Prevention     -  Breast Cancer Screening
Men with breast cancer usually have lumps that can be felt.Lumps and other signs may be caused by male breast cancer or by other conditions. Check with your doctor if you notice a change in your breasts.
Survival for men with breast cancer is similar to survival for women with breast cancer.
                    Survival for men with breast cancer is similar to that for women with breast cancer when their stage at diagnosis is the same. Breast cancer in men, however, is often diagnosed at a later stage. Cancer found at a later stage may be less likely to be cured.
                
                
                    Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options.
                    The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following:         - The stage of the cancer (whether it is in the breast only or has spread to other places in the body).    - The type of breast cancer.    - Estrogen-receptor and progesterone-receptor levels in the tumor tissue.    - Whether the cancer is also found in the other breast.    - The patients age and general health.
Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is a rare and aggressive type of breast cancer in which the cancer cells block the lymph vessels in the skin of the breast. This type of breast cancer is called inflammatory because the breast often looks swollen and red, or inflamed. The skin may also look dimpled like the skin of an orange. IBC can be difficult to diagnose because there is no lump to feel or detect on a mammogram. It is crucial to identify IBC right away because early diagnosis and treatment can greatly improve the outcome. Patients are often given a combination of treatments, including chemotherapy, surgery, and radiation therapy. Approximately one-third of individuals diagnosed with IBC will become long-term survivors. Like other types of breast cancer, IBC can occur in men, but usually at an older age than in women. Some studies have shown an association between family history of breast cancer and IBC, but more studies are needed to draw firm conclusions.
Breast cancer is a disease in which certain cells in the breast become abnormal and multiply uncontrollably to form a tumor. Although breast cancer is much more common in women, this form of cancer can also develop in men. In both women and men, the most common form of breast cancer begins in cells lining the milk ducts (ductal cancer). In women, cancer can also develop in the glands that produce milk (lobular cancer). Most men have little or no lobular tissue, so lobular cancer in men is very rare.  In its early stages, breast cancer usually does not cause pain and may exhibit no noticeable symptoms. As the cancer progresses, signs and symptoms can include a lump or thickening in or near the breast; a change in the size or shape of the breast; nipple discharge, tenderness, or retraction (turning inward); and skin irritation, dimpling, or scaliness. However, these changes can occur as part of many different conditions. Having one or more of these symptoms does not mean that a person definitely has breast cancer.  In some cases, cancerous tumors can invade surrounding tissue and spread to other parts of the body. If breast cancer spreads, cancerous cells most often appear in the bones, liver, lungs, or brain. Tumors that begin at one site and then spread to other areas of the body are called metastatic cancers.  A small percentage of all breast cancers cluster in families. These cancers are described as hereditary and are associated with inherited gene mutations. Hereditary breast cancers tend to develop earlier in life than noninherited (sporadic) cases, and new (primary) tumors are more likely to develop in both breasts.
Breast cancer is the second most commonly diagnosed cancer in women. (Only skin cancer is more common.) About one in eight women in the United States will develop invasive breast cancer in her lifetime. Researchers estimate that more than 230,000 new cases of invasive breast cancer will be diagnosed in U.S. women in 2015.  Male breast cancer represents less than 1 percent of all breast cancer diagnoses. Scientists estimate that about 2,300 new cases of breast cancer will be diagnosed in men in 2015.  Particular gene mutations associated with breast cancer are more common among certain geographic or ethnic groups, such as people of Ashkenazi (central or eastern European) Jewish heritage and people of Norwegian, Icelandic, or Dutch ancestry.
Most cases of breast cancer are not caused by inherited genetic factors. These cancers are associated with somatic mutations in breast cells that are acquired during a person's lifetime, and they do not cluster in families.  In hereditary breast cancer, the way that cancer risk is inherited depends on the gene involved. For example, mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to increase a person's chance of developing cancer. Although breast cancer is more common in women than in men, the mutated gene can be inherited from either the mother or the father.  In the other syndromes discussed above, the gene mutations that increase cancer risk also have an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. It is important to note that people inherit an increased likelihood of developing cancer, not the disease itself. Not all people who inherit mutations in these genes will ultimately develop cancer.  In many cases of breast cancer that clusters in families, the genetic basis for the disease and the mechanism of inheritance are unclear.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of breast cancer:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: BRCA1 and BRCA2 Hereditary Breast/Ovarian Cancer  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Li-Fraumeni Syndrome  - Gene Review: Gene Review: PTEN Hamartoma Tumor Syndrome (PHTS)  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Familial cancer of breast  - Genomics Education Programme (UK): Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer  - National Cancer Institute: Breast Cancer Risk Assessment Tool  - National Cancer Institute: Genetic Testing for BRCA1 and BRCA2: It's Your Choice  - National Cancer Institute: Genetic Testing for Hereditary Cancer Syndromes   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care