Brittle cornea syndrome (BCS) is a type of connective tissue disorder that mainly affects the eyes, joints and skin. Signs and symptoms may include rupture of the cornea after only minor trauma; degeneration of the cornea (keratoconus) or thinning and protrusion of the cornea (keratoglobus); bluish tint in the white part of the eyes (blue sclerae); hypermobile joints; hyperelastic skin; hearing defects; and dental abnormalities. There are 2 types of BCS which are distinguished by the mutated gene that causes the condition. BCS type 1 is caused by mutations in the ZNF469 gene and BCS type 2 is caused by mutations in the PRDM5 gene. BCS is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Brittle cornea syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Corneal dystrophy 90% Decreased corneal thickness 90% Myopia 90% Atypical scarring of skin 50% Blue sclerae 50% Bruising susceptibility 50% Conductive hearing impairment 50% Gait disturbance 50% Joint hypermobility 50% Myalgia 50% Reduced bone mineral density 50% Sensorineural hearing impairment 50% Visual impairment 50% Abnormality of epiphysis morphology 7.5% Abnormality of the hip bone 7.5% Abnormality of the mitral valve 7.5% Abnormality of the pulmonary valve 7.5% Abnormality of the teeth 7.5% Cleft palate 7.5% Corneal erosion 7.5% Glaucoma 7.5% Hernia 7.5% Recurrent fractures 7.5% Retinal detachment 7.5% Scoliosis 7.5% Flat cornea 5% Inguinal hernia 5% Megalocornea 5% Sclerocornea 5% Umbilical hernia 5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Congenital hip dislocation - Dentinogenesis imperfecta - Disproportionate tall stature - Epicanthus - Hearing impairment - Joint laxity - Keratoconus - Keratoglobus - Macrocephaly - Mitral valve prolapse - Molluscoid pseudotumors - Palmoplantar cutis laxa - Red hair - Spondylolisthesis - Visual loss - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Brittle diabetes is characterized by severe instability of blood glucose levels with frequent and unpredictable episodes of hypoglycemia and/or ketoacidosis that disrupt quality of life, often requiring frequent or prolonged hospitalizations. These unpredictable episodes are due to an absolute insulin dependency, affecting type 1 diabetics almost exclusively. Brittle diabetes is most common in women in their twenties or thirties, but can occur at any age and in either gender. The condition may be caused by stress and hormonal inbalance, neglect of self-care (noncompliance), or underlying medical conditions such as malabsorption, delayed gastric emptying due to autonomic neuropathy, drug or alcohol use or abnormal insulin absorption or degradation. Treatment is difficult and dependent upon the underlying cause.
 The main symptom of brittle diabetes is severe instability of blood glucose levels with frequent and unpredictable episodes of hypoglycemia and/or ketoacidosis that cause a disruption of daily activities. Three clinical presentations have been described: Predominant hyperglycemia with recurrent ketoacidosis, Predominant hypoglycemia, and Mixed hyper- and hypoglycemia. Patients with brittle diabetes have wide swings in their blood sugar levels and often experience differing blood sugar responses to the same dose and type of insulin. Complications such as neuropathy, nephropathy, and retinopathy are common. Most patients are females in their twenties of thirties, though any age or gender can be affected.
 There are multiple causes of brittle diabetes. Emotional stress seems to play an important role, in some cases leading to hormonal inbalances which can lead to brittle diabetes. Emotional stress can also lead to a shift in the behavior of an individual, leading them to neglect their self-care. Other cases can be traced to physiological causes, including malabsorption, delayed gastric emptying due to autonomic neuropathy (gastroparesis), celiac disease, impaired glucose counterregulation (which doesn't allow the patient's body to react as it should when blood glucose levels drop), hypothyroidism and adrenal insufficiency, drug or alcohol use, systemic insulin resistance, and abnormal insulin absorption or degradation.
 The approach to management depends upon the underlying cause. General management strategies include diabetes education, frequent self-monitoring of blood glucose, the use of a continuous subcutaneous insulin pump in conjunction with a continuous glucose monitoring device, and, in rare cases, pancreas transplantation. Psychotherapy or working with a psychiatrist or psychologist is recommended for many people with brittle diabetes. Referral to a specialty center may be warranted in certain situations.