Damage to the walls of the airways usually is the cause of bronchiectasis. A lung infection may cause this damage. Examples of lung infections that can lead to bronchiectasis include:
                
Severe pneumonia (nu-MO-ne-ah)
                
Whooping cough or measles (uncommon in the United States due to vaccination)
                
Tuberculosis
                
Fungal infections
                
Conditions that damage the airways and raise the risk of lung infections also can lead to bronchiectasis. Examples of such conditions include:
                
Cystic fibrosis. This disease leads to almost half of the cases of bronchiectasis in the United States.
                
Immunodeficiency disorders, such as common variable immunodeficiency and, less often, HIV and AIDS.
                
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (AS-per-ji-LO-sis). This is an allergic reaction to a fungus called aspergillus. The reaction causes swelling in the airways.
                
Disorders that affect cilia (SIL-e-ah) function, such as primary ciliary dyskinesia. Cilia are small, hair-like structures that line your airways. They help clear mucus (a slimy substance) out of your airways.
                
Chronic (ongoing) pulmonary aspiration (as-pih-RA-shun). This is a condition in which you inhale food, liquids, saliva, or vomited stomach contents into your lungs. Aspiration can inflame the airways, which can lead to bronchiectasis.
                
Connective tissue diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, Sjgrens syndrome, and Crohns disease.
                
Other conditions, such as an airway blockage, also can lead to bronchiectasis. Many things can cause a blockage, such as a growth or a noncancerous tumor. An inhaled object, such as a piece of a toy or a peanut that you inhaled as a child, also can cause an airway blockage.
                
A problem with how the lungs form in a fetus may cause congenital bronchiectasis. This condition affects infants and children.
People who have conditions that damage the lungs or increase the risk of lung infections are at risk for bronchiectasis. Such conditions include:
                
Cystic fibrosis. This disease leads to almost half of the cases of bronchiectasis in the United States.
                
Immunodeficiency disorders, such as common variable immunodeficiency and, less often, HIV and AIDS.
                
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. This is an allergic reaction to a fungus called aspergillus. The reaction causes swelling in the airways.
                
Disorders that affect cilia function, such as primary ciliary dyskinesia. Cilia are small, hair-like structures that line your airways. They help clear mucus (a slimy substance) out of your airways.
                
Bronchiectasis can develop at any age. Overall, two-thirds of people who have the condition are women. However, in children, the condition is more common in boys than in girls.
The initial airway damage that leads to bronchiectasis often begins in childhood. However, signs and symptoms may not appear until months or even years after you start having repeated lung infections.
                
The most common signs and symptoms of bronchiectasis are:
                
A daily cough that occurs over months or years
                
Daily production of large amounts of sputum (spit). Sputum, which you cough up and spit out, may contain mucus (a slimy substance), trapped particles, and pus.
                
Shortness of breath and wheezing (a whistling sound when you breathe)
                
Chest pain
                
Clubbing (the flesh under your fingernails and toenails gets thicker)
                
If your doctor listens to your lungs with a stethoscope, he or she may hear abnormal lung sounds.
                
Over time, you may have more serious symptoms. You may cough up blood or bloody mucus and feel very tired. Children may lose weight or not grow at a normal rate.
                
Complications of Bronchiectasis
                
Severe bronchiectasis can lead to other serious health conditions, such as respiratory failure and atelectasis.
                
Respiratory failure is a condition in which not enough oxygen passes from your lungs into your blood. The condition also can occur if your lungs can't properly remove carbon dioxide (a waste gas) from your blood.
                
Respiratory failure can cause shortness of breath, rapid breathing, and air hunger (feeling like you can't breathe in enough air). In severe cases, signs and symptoms may include a bluish color on your skin, lips, and fingernails; confusion; and sleepiness.
                
Atelectasis is a condition in which one or more areas of your lungs collapse or don't inflate properly. As a result, you may feel short of breath. Your heart rate and breathing rate may increase, and your skin and lips may turn blue.
                
If bronchiectasis is so advanced that it affects all parts of your airways, it may cause heart failure. Heart failure is a condition in which the heart can't pump enough blood to meet the body's needs.
                
The most common signs and symptoms of heart failure are shortness of breath or trouble breathing, tiredness, and swelling in the ankles, feet, legs, abdomen, and veins in the neck.
Your doctor may suspect bronchiectasis if you have a daily cough that produces large amounts of sputum (spit).
                
To find out whether you have bronchiectasis, your doctor may recommend tests to:
                
Identify any underlying causes that require treatment
                
Rule out other causes of your symptoms
                
Find out how much your airways are damaged
                
Diagnostic Tests and Procedures
                
Chest CT Scan
                
A chest computed tomography (to-MOG-ra-fee) scan, or chest CT scan, is the most common test for diagnosing bronchiectasis.
                
This painless test creates precise pictures of your airways and other structures in your chest. A chest CT scan can show the extent and location of lung damage. This test gives more detailed pictures than a standard chest x ray.
                
Chest X Ray
                
This painless test creates pictures of the structures in your chest, such as your heart and lungs. A chest x ray can show areas of abnormal lung and thickened, irregular airway walls.
                
Other Tests
                
Your doctor may recommend other tests, such as:
                
Blood tests. These tests can show whether you have an underlying condition that can lead to bronchiectasis. Blood tests also can show whether you have an infection or low levels of certain infection-fighting blood cells.
                
A sputum culture. Lab tests can show whether a sample of your sputum contains bacteria (such as the bacteria that cause tuberculosis) or fungi.
                
Lung function tests. These tests measure how much air you can breathe in and out, how fast you can breathe air out, and how well your lungs deliver oxygen to your blood. Lung function tests help show how much lung damage you have.
                
A sweat test or other tests for cystic fibrosis.
                
Bronchoscopy
                
If your bronchiectasis doesn't respond to treatment, your doctor may recommend bronchoscopy (bron-KOS-ko-pee). Doctors use this procedure to look inside the airways.
                
During bronchoscopy, a flexible tube with a light on the end is inserted through your nose or mouth into your airways. The tube is called a bronchoscope. It provides a video image of your airways. You'll be given medicine to numb your upper airway and help you relax during the procedure.
                
Bronchoscopy can show whether you have a blockage in your airways. The procedure also can show the source of any bleeding in your airways.
To prevent bronchiectasis, it's important to prevent the lung infections and lung damage that can cause it.
                
Childhood vaccines for measles and whooping cough prevent infections related to these illnesses. These vaccines also reduce complications from these infections, such as bronchiectasis.
                
Avoiding toxic fumes, gases, smoke, and other harmful substances also can help protect your lungs.
                
Proper treatment of lung infections in children also may help preserve lung function and prevent lung damage that can lead to bronchiectasis.
                
Stay alert to keep children (and adults) from inhaling small objects (such as pieces of toys and food that might stick in a small airway). If you think you, your child, or someone else has inhaled a small object, seek prompt medical care.
                
In some cases, treating the underlying cause of bronchiectasis can slow or prevent its progression.