C1q nephropathy is a kidney disease in which a large amount of protein is lost in the urine. It is one of the many diseases that can cause the nephrotic syndrome. C1q is a normal protein in the immune system, and can be found floating in the circulation of most healthy people. In C1q nephropathy, however, this protein can also be found deposited throughout the kidneys. It has been thought to be a subgroup of primary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis or to be a combination of several disease groups rather than a single disease. As a disease, it is very similar to minimal change disease (MCD) and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS). Criteria diagnosis includes C1q deposits on the kidney and no evidence of systemic lupus erythematosus. Both children and adult patients may have no symptoms, except for the presence of blood or protein in the urine, or  present with swelling of the feet and legs, high blood pressure and kidney insufficiency. The treatment of C1q nephropathy is the same as for MCD or FSGS and includes corticosteroids and other immunosuppressive agents. Further research is needed to establish C1q nephropathy as a recognized distinct clinical entity.
C1q deficiency is a rare disorder associated with recurrent skin lesions, chronic infections, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) or SLE-like diseases. It has also been associated with a kidney disease known as mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis. C1q is a protein and together with other proteins, C1r and C1s, it forms the C1 complex. This complex is important for the activation of the complement system (a group of proteins that work with the immune system). It also disposes cells that are dead. C1q deficiency presents in 2 different forms, absent C1q protein or abnormal C1q protein. Symptoms include infections (ear infections (otitis media), meningitis, urinary tract infections, oral infections); skin lesions (small blisters (vesicles), dark patches, and atrophic areas) that get worse upon light exposure; cataracts; loss of eyelashes, eyebrows, and scalp hair; blood in urine; and glomerulonephritis. About 93% of cases are associated with systemic lupus erythematosus. It can be caused by mutations in the C1QA, C1QB or C1QC genes and is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Treatment depends on the symptoms. Recently, it was shown that C1q production can be restored by allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, a  procedure in which a person receives blood-forming stem cells (cells from which all blood cells develop) from a genetically similar, but not identical donor.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for C1q deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis 7.5% Systemic lupus erythematosus 7.5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Decreased serum complement factor I - Recurrent infections - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.