CADASIL (Cerebral Autosomal Dominant Arteriopathy with Sub-cortical Infarcts and Leukoencephalopathy) is an inherited disease of the blood vessels that occurs when the thickening of blood vessel walls blocks the flow of blood to the brain. The disease primarily affects the small blood vessels in the white matter of the brain. CADASIL is characterized by migraine headaches and multiple strokes, which progresses to dementia. Other symptoms include white matter lesions throughout the brain, cognitive deterioration, seizures, vision problems, and psychiatric problems such as severe depression and changes in behavior and personality. Individuals may also be at higher risk of heart attack. Symptoms and disease onset vary widely, with signs typically appearing in the mid-30s. Some individuals may not show signs of the disease until later in life. CADASIL is caused by a change (or mutation) in a gene called NOTCH3 and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.
 CADASIL is caused by a mutation in the NOTCH3 gene. The NOTCH3 gene gives the body instructions to make the Notch3 receptor protein, needed for normal function and survival of vascular smooth muscle cells. Mutations in NOTCH3 cause the body to make an abnormal protein, thus impairing the function and survival of vascular smooth muscle cells and causing these cells to self-destruct. The loss of vascular smooth muscle cells in the brain causes blood vessel damage that leads to the characteristic features of CADASIL.
How  CADASIL is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that having a mutation in only one copy of the responsible gene in each cell is enough to cause CADASIL. In most cases, an affected person inherits the mutated gene from an affected parent. In rare cases, CADASIL may result from having a new mutation in the gene, in which case it is not inherited from a parent. When a person with an autosomal dominant condition has children, each child has a 50% (1 in 2) chance to inherit the mutated copy of the gene.
 There is currently no treatment for CADASIL that is proven to be effective. While antiplatelet treatment is often used, it is also not proven to be useful. Migraine should be treated both symptomatically and prophylactically (with preventative methods), depending on the frequency of symptoms. When hypertension, diabetes or hypercholesterolemia (high cholesterol) are also present, they should be treated. Supportive care, including practical help, emotional support, and counseling, is useful for affected people and their families. Smoking increases the risk of stroke, so affected people who smoke should quit.
Symptoms usually progress slowly. By age 65, the majority of persons with CADASIL have cognitive problems and dementia. Some will become dependent due to multiple strokes.
The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) conducts stroke research and clinical trials at its laboratories and clinics at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and through grants to major medical institutions across the country. Scientists are currently studying different drugs to reduce cognitive problems seen in patients with CADASIL. Researchers are also looking at ways to overcome an over-reaction to hormones that lead to high blood pressure and poor blood supply in patients with CADASIL.