Carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency is a condition that prevents the body from converting certain fats called long-chain fatty acids into energy, particularly during periods without food (fasting). Carnitine, a natural substance acquired mostly through the diet, is used by cells to process fats and produce energy. People with this disorder have a faulty transporter that disrupts carnitine's role in processing long-chain fatty acids. Carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency is a type of fatty acid oxidation disorder. There are two forms of carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency. The most common type happens in newborns. A milder, less common type happens in older infants and children.
 Carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency occurs when an enzyme, called "carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase" (CAT), is either missing or not working properly. This enzyme's job is to help change certain fats in the food we eat into energy. It also helps to break down fat already stored in the body. Energy from fat keeps us going whenever our bodies run low of their main source of energy, a type of sugar called glucose. Our bodies rely on fat for energy when we don't eat for a stretch of time - like when we miss a meal or when we sleep. When the CAT normal enzyme is missing or not working well, the body cannot use fat for energy, and must rely solely on glucose. Although glucose is a good source of energy, there is a limited amount available. Once the glucose has been used up, the body tries to use fat without success. This leads to low blood sugar, called hypoglycemia, and to the build up of harmful substances in the blood.
 Carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
 Genetic testing for carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency can be done on a blood sample. Genetic testing, also called DNA testing, looks for changes in the pair of genes that cause carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency. In some affected children, both gene changes can be found. However, in other children, neither or only one of the two gene changes can be found, even though we know they are present. DNA testing is not necessary to diagnose carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency, however, it can be helpful for carrier testing or prenatal diagnosis.
 Although there is no standard treatment plan for carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency, there are treatments that have been found to be helpful in the management of this condition. Certain treatments may be helpful for some children but not others. When necessary, treatment are usually needed throughout life. Children with carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency should be followed by a metabolic doctor  and a dietician in addition to their primary doctor. Aggressive treatment of hypoglycemia, hyperammonemia and prevention of lipolysis (the breakdown of fat stored in fat cells) in the newborn may be lifesaving. Infants and young children with carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency need to eat frequently to prevent a metabolic crisis. In general, it is often suggested that infants be fed every four to six hours, although some babies need to eat even more frequently than this. It is important that infants be fed during the night. They may need to be woken up to eat if they do not wake up on their own. Sometimes a low-fat, high carbohydrate diet is advised. Carbohydrates give the body many types of sugar that can be used as energy. In fact, for children needing this treatment, most food in the diet should be carbohydrates (bread, pasta, fruit, vegetables, etc.) and protein (lean meat and low-fat dairy food). Some children may be helped by taking L-carnitine. This is a safe and natural substance that helps body cells make energy. It also helps the body get rid of harmful wastes. However, supplementation with carnitine remains controversial, as its efficacy remains unknown. Medium Chain Triglyceride oil (MCT oil) is sometimes used as part of the food plan for people with carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency. This special oil has medium chain fatty acids that people with carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency can use in small amounts for energy. You may be instructed to call your child's doctor at the start of any illness. Children with carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency need to eat extra starchy food and drink more fluids during any illness (even if they may not feel hungry) or they could develop a metabolic crisis.
Carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase (CACT) deficiency is a condition that prevents the body from using certain fats for energy, particularly during periods without food (fasting). Signs and symptoms of this disorder usually begin soon after birth and may include breathing problems, seizures, and an irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia). Affected individuals typically have low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) and a low level of ketones, which are produced during the breakdown of fats and used for energy. Together these signs are called hypoketotic hypoglycemia. People with CACT deficiency also usually have excess ammonia in the blood (hyperammonemia), an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly), and a weakened heart muscle (cardiomyopathy).  Many infants with CACT deficiency do not survive the newborn period. Some affected individuals have a less severe form of the condition and do not develop signs and symptoms until early childhood. These individuals are at risk for liver failure, nervous system damage, coma, and sudden death.
CACT deficiency is very rare; at least 30 cases have been reported.
Mutations in the SLC25A20 gene cause CACT deficiency. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase (CACT). This protein is essential for fatty acid oxidation, a multistep process that breaks down (metabolizes) fats and converts them into energy. Fatty acid oxidation takes place within mitochondria, which are the energy-producing centers in cells. A group of fats called long-chain fatty acids must be attached to a substance known as carnitine to enter mitochondria. Once these fatty acids are joined with carnitine, the CACT protein transports them into mitochondria. Fatty acids are a major source of energy for the heart and muscles. During periods of fasting, fatty acids are also an important energy source for the liver and other tissues.  Although mutations in the SLC25A20 gene change the structure of the CACT protein in different ways, they all lead to a shortage (deficiency) of the transporter. Without enough functional CACT protein, long-chain fatty acids cannot be transported into mitochondria. As a result, these fatty acids are not converted to energy. Reduced energy production can lead to some of the features of CACT deficiency, such as hypoketotic hypoglycemia. Fatty acids and long-chain acylcarnitines (fatty acids still attached to carnitine) may also build up in cells and damage the liver, heart, and muscles. This abnormal buildup causes the other signs and symptoms of the disorder.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of CACT deficiency:  - Baby's First Test  - FOD (Fatty Oxidation Disorders) Family Support Group: Diagnostic Approach to Disorders of Fat Oxidation - Information for Clinicians  - Genetic Testing Registry: Carnitine acylcarnitine translocase deficiency   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care