Carney complex is an inherited condition characterized by spotty skin pigmentation, cardiac (heart) myxomas (tumors composed of mucous connective tissue), skin myxomas, endocrine tumors or over-activity, and schwannomas. Some families with this condition have been found to have mutations in the PRKAR1A gene. Carney complex is believed to be inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, which means that one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent.
Carney complex is a rare disorder; fewer than 750 affected individuals have been identified.
Mutations in the PRKAR1A gene cause most cases of Carney complex. This gene provides instructions for making one part (subunit) of an enzyme called protein kinase A, which promotes cell growth and division (proliferation). The subunit produced from the PRKAR1A gene, called type 1 alpha, helps control whether protein kinase A is turned on or off.  Most mutations in the PRKAR1A gene that cause Carney complex result in an abnormal type 1 alpha subunit that is quickly broken down (degraded) by the cell. The lack of this subunit causes protein kinase A to be turned on more often than normal, which leads to uncontrolled cell proliferation. The signs and symptoms of Carney complex are related to the unregulated growth of cells in many parts of the body.  Some individuals with Carney complex do not have identified mutations in the PRKAR1A gene. In many of these cases, the disorder is associated with a specific region on the short (p) arm of chromosome 2, designated as 2p16. Researchers have not discovered the gene within this region that is responsible for Carney complex.
Carney complex is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In approximately 80 percent of cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. The remaining cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of Carney complex in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Carney complex:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Carney Complex  - Genetic Testing Registry: Carney complex  - Genetic Testing Registry: Carney complex, type 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Carney complex, type 2  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Atrial Myxoma  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Pituitary Tumor   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care