Carnitine palmitoyltransferase 2 (CPT2) deficiency is a condition that prevents the body from using certain fats for energy, particularly during periods without food (fasting). There are three main types of CPT2 deficiency: a lethal neonatal form, a severe infantile hepatocardiomuscular form, and a myopathic form. The neonatal and infantile forms are severe multisystemic diseases characterized by liver failure with hypoketotic hypoglycemia (extremely low levels of ketones (substances produced when fat cells break down in the blood) and low blood sugar), cardiomyopathy, seizures, and early death. The myopathic form is characterized by exercise-induced muscle pain and weakness and occasional myoglobinuria (rust-colored urine indicating breakdown of muscle tissue). Mutations in the CPT2 gene cause CPT2 deficiency. It is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Treatment is based on avoidance of prolonged fasting and a low-fat and high-carbohydrate diet.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Carnitine palmitoyltransferase 2 deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Elevated hepatic transaminases 90% Hepatomegaly 90% Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 90% Muscle weakness 90% Myalgia 90% Myopathy 90% Seizures 90% Cerebral calcification 50% Multicystic kidney dysplasia 50% Renal insufficiency 50% Encephalitis 7.5% Hypoglycemia 7.5% Reduced consciousness/confusion 7.5% Sudden cardiac death 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Primary carnitine deficiency is a genetic condition that prevents the body from using certain fats for energy, particularly during periods without food (fasting). The nature and severity of signs and symptoms may vary, but they most often appear during infancy or early childhood and can include severe brain dysfunction (encephalopathy), cardiomyopathy, confusion, vomiting, muscle weakness, and hypoglycemia. Some individuals may only have fatigability in adulthood, or no symptoms at all. This condition is caused by mutations in the SLC22A5 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment and prevention of symptoms typically includes oral L-carnitine supplementation.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Primary carnitine deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cardiomegaly - Coma - Confusion - Congestive heart failure - Decreased carnitine level in liver - Decreased plasma carnitine - Elevated hepatic transaminases - Encephalopathy - Endocardial fibroelastosis - Failure to thrive - Hepatic steatosis - Hepatomegaly - Hyperammonemia - Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy - Impaired gluconeogenesis - Lethargy - Muscular hypotonia - Myopathy - Recurrent hypoglycemia - Reduced muscle carnitine level - Somnolence - Vomiting - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Mutations in the SLC22A5 gene cause primary carnitine deficiency. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called OCTN2 that transports carnitine into cells. Cells need carnitine to bring certain types of fats (fatty acids) into mitochondria, which are the energy-producing centers within cells. Fatty acids are a major source of energy for the heart and muscles. During periods of fasting, fatty acids are also an important energy source for the liver and other tissues. Mutations in the SLC22A5 gene result in an absent or dysfunctional OCTN2 protein. As a result, there is a shortage (deficiency) of carnitine within cells. This deficiency, as well as potential build-up of fatty acids within the cells, causes the signs and symptoms of the condition.
How  Primary carnitine deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Individuals have two copies of each gene, one of which is inherited from each parent. For an individual to have an autosomal recessive condition, he/she must have a mutation in both copies of the disease-causing gene. The parents of an affected individual, who each likely have one mutated copy, are referred to as carriers. Carriers typically do not have any signs or symptoms of the condition. When two carriers for an autosomal recessive condition have children together, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be a carrier like each of the parents, and a 25% risk to not have the condition and not be a carrier.
 Most individuals with primary carnitine deficiency are followed by a metabolic doctor as well as a dietician familiar with this condition. Certain treatments may be advised for some children but not others. Treatment is often needed throughout life. The main treatment for this condition is lifelong use of L-carnitine, which is a natural substance that helps body cells make energy. It also helps the body get rid of harmful wastes. L-carnitine can reverse the heart problems and muscle weakness caused by this condition. In addition to L-carnitine, infants and young children with primary carnitine deficiency need to eat frequently to prevent a metabolic crisis. In general, it is often suggested that infants be fed every four to six hours. But some babies need to eat even more frequently than this. Many teens and adults with this condition can go without food for up to 12 hours without problems. Some children and teens benefit from a low-fat, high carbohydrate diet. Any diet changes should be made under the guidance of a metabolic specialist and/or dietician familiar with this condition. Ask your doctor whether your child needs to have any changes in his or her diet. Other treatments usually need to be continued throughout life. Infants and children with this condition need to eat extra starchy food and drink more fluids during any illness, even if they may not feel hungry, because they could have a metabolic crisis. Children who are sick often do not want to eat. If they wont or cant eat, they may need to be treated in the hospital to prevent serious health problems.
Carnitine palmitoyltransferase I (CPT I) deficiency is a condition that prevents the body from using certain fats for energy, particularly during periods without food (fasting). The severity of this condition varies among affected individuals.  Signs and symptoms of CPT I deficiency often appear during early childhood. Affected individuals usually have low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) and a low level of ketones, which are produced during the breakdown of fats and used for energy. Together these signs are called hypoketotic hypoglycemia. People with CPT I deficiency can also have an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly), liver malfunction, and elevated levels of carnitine in the blood. Carnitine, a natural substance acquired mostly through the diet, is used by cells to process fats and produce energy. Individuals with CPT I deficiency are at risk for nervous system damage, liver failure, seizures, coma, and sudden death.  Problems related to CPT I deficiency can be triggered by periods of fasting or by illnesses such as viral infections. This disorder is sometimes mistaken for Reye syndrome, a severe disorder that may develop in children while they appear to be recovering from viral infections such as chicken pox or flu. Most cases of Reye syndrome are associated with the use of aspirin during these viral infections.
CPT I deficiency is a rare disorder; fewer than 50 affected individuals have been identified. This disorder may be more common in the Hutterite and Inuit populations.
Mutations in the CPT1A gene cause CPT I deficiency. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1A, which is found in the liver. Carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1A is essential for fatty acid oxidation, which is the multistep process that breaks down (metabolizes) fats and converts them into energy. Fatty acid oxidation takes place within mitochondria, which are the energy-producing centers in cells. A group of fats called long-chain fatty acids cannot enter mitochondria unless they are attached to carnitine. Carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1A connects carnitine to long-chain fatty acids so they can enter mitochondria and be used to produce energy. During periods of fasting, long-chain fatty acids are an important energy source for the liver and other tissues.  Mutations in the CPT1A gene severely reduce or eliminate the activity of carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1A. Without enough of this enzyme, carnitine is not attached to long-chain fatty acids. As a result, these fatty acids cannot enter mitochondria and be converted into energy. Reduced energy production can lead to some of the features of CPT I deficiency, such as hypoketotic hypoglycemia. Fatty acids may also build up in cells and damage the liver, heart, and brain. This abnormal buildup causes the other signs and symptoms of the disorder.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of CPT I deficiency:  - Baby's First Test  - FOD (Fatty Oxidation Disorders) Family Support Group: Diagnostic Approach to Disorders of Fat Oxidation - Information for Clinicians  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Carnitine Palmitoyltransferase 1A Deficiency  - Genetic Testing Registry: Carnitine palmitoyltransferase I deficiency   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Carnitine palmitoyltransferase II (CPT II) deficiency is a condition that prevents the body from using certain fats for energy, particularly during periods without food (fasting). There are three main types of CPT II deficiency: a lethal neonatal form, a severe infantile hepatocardiomuscular form, and a myopathic form.  The lethal neonatal form of CPT II deficiency becomes apparent soon after birth. Infants with this form of the disorder develop respiratory failure, seizures, liver failure, a weakened heart muscle (cardiomyopathy), and an irregular heart beat (arrhythmia). Affected individuals also have low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) and a low level of ketones, which are produced during the breakdown of fats and used for energy. Together these signs are called hypoketotic hypoglycemia. In many cases, the brain and kidneys are also structurally abnormal. Infants with the lethal neonatal form of CPT II deficiency usually live for a few days to a few months.  The severe infantile hepatocardiomuscular form of CPT II deficiency affects the liver, heart, and muscles. Signs and symptoms usually appear within the first year of life. This form involves recurring episodes of hypoketotic hypoglycemia, seizures, an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly), cardiomyopathy, and arrhythmia. Problems related to this form of CPT II deficiency can be triggered by periods of fasting or by illnesses such as viral infections. Individuals with the severe infantile hepatocardiomuscular form of CPT II deficiency are at risk for liver failure, nervous system damage, coma, and sudden death.  The myopathic form is the least severe type of CPT II deficiency. This form is characterized by recurrent episodes of muscle pain (myalgia) and weakness and is associated with the breakdown of muscle tissue (rhabdomyolysis). The destruction of muscle tissue releases a protein called myoglobin, which is processed by the kidneys and released in the urine (myoglobinuria). Myoglobin causes the urine to be red or brown. This protein can also damage the kidneys, in some cases leading to life-threatening kidney failure. Episodes of myalgia and rhabdomyolysis may be triggered by exercise, stress, exposure to extreme temperatures, infections, or fasting. The first episode usually occurs during childhood or adolescence. Most people with the myopathic form of CPT II deficiency have no signs or symptoms of the disorder between episodes.
CPT II deficiency is a rare disorder. The lethal neonatal form has been described in at least 18 families, while the severe infantile hepatocardiomuscular form has been identified in approximately 30 families. The myopathic form occurs most frequently, with more than 300 reported cases.
Mutations in the CPT2 gene cause CPT II deficiency. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called carnitine palmitoyltransferase 2. This enzyme is essential for fatty acid oxidation, which is the multistep process that breaks down (metabolizes) fats and converts them into energy. Fatty acid oxidation takes place within mitochondria, which are the energy-producing centers in cells. A group of fats called long-chain fatty acids must be attached to a substance known as carnitine to enter mitochondria. Once these fatty acids are inside mitochondria, carnitine palmitoyltransferase 2 removes the carnitine and prepares them for fatty acid oxidation. Fatty acids are a major source of energy for the heart and muscles. During periods of fasting, fatty acids are also an important energy source for the liver and other tissues.  Mutations in the CPT2 gene reduce the activity of carnitine palmitoyltransferase 2. Without enough of this enzyme, carnitine is not removed from long-chain fatty acids. As a result, these fatty acids cannot be metabolized to produce energy. Reduced energy production can lead to some of the features of CPT II deficiency, such as hypoketotic hypoglycemia, myalgia, and weakness. Fatty acids and long-chain acylcarnitines (fatty acids still attached to carnitine) may also build up in cells and damage the liver, heart, and muscles. This abnormal buildup causes the other signs and symptoms of the disorder.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of CPT II deficiency:  - Baby's First Test  - FOD (Fatty Oxidation Disorders) Family Support Group: Diagnostic Approach to Disorders of Fat Oxidation - Information for Clinicians  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Carnitine Palmitoyltransferase II Deficiency  - Genetic Testing Registry: CARNITINE PALMITOYLTRANSFERASE II DEFICIENCY, LATE-ONSET  - Genetic Testing Registry: CARNITINE PALMITOYLTRANSFERASE II DEFICIENCY, LETHAL NEONATAL  - Genetic Testing Registry: Carnitine palmitoyltransferase II deficiency  - Genetic Testing Registry: Carnitine palmitoyltransferase II deficiency, infantile   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Primary carnitine deficiency is a condition that prevents the body from using certain fats for energy, particularly during periods without food (fasting). Carnitine, a natural substance acquired mostly through the diet, is used by cells to process fats and produce energy.  Signs and symptoms of primary carnitine deficiency typically appear during infancy or early childhood and can include severe brain dysfunction (encephalopathy), a weakened and enlarged heart (cardiomyopathy), confusion, vomiting, muscle weakness, and low blood sugar (hypoglycemia). The severity of this condition varies among affected individuals. Some people with primary carnitine deficiency are asymptomatic, which means they do not have any signs or symptoms of the condition. All individuals with this disorder are at risk for heart failure, liver problems, coma, and sudden death.  Problems related to primary carnitine deficiency can be triggered by periods of fasting or by illnesses such as viral infections. This disorder is sometimes mistaken for Reye syndrome, a severe disorder that may develop in children while they appear to be recovering from viral infections such as chicken pox or flu. Most cases of Reye syndrome are associated with the use of aspirin during these viral infections.
The incidence of primary carnitine deficiency in the general population is approximately 1 in 100,000 newborns. In Japan, this disorder affects 1 in every 40,000 newborns.
Mutations in the SLC22A5 gene cause primary carnitine deficiency. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called OCTN2 that transports carnitine into cells. Cells need carnitine to bring certain types of fats (fatty acids) into mitochondria, which are the energy-producing centers within cells. Fatty acids are a major source of energy for the heart and muscles. During periods of fasting, fatty acids are also an important energy source for the liver and other tissues.  Mutations in the SLC22A5 gene result in an absent or dysfunctional OCTN2 protein. As a result, there is a shortage (deficiency) of carnitine within cells. Without carnitine, fatty acids cannot enter mitochondria and be used to make energy. Reduced energy production can lead to some of the features of primary carnitine deficiency, such as muscle weakness and hypoglycemia. Fatty acids may also build up in cells and damage the liver, heart, and muscles. This abnormal buildup causes the other signs and symptoms of the disorder.
Primary carnitine deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. Most often, the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive disorder are carriers, which means they each carry one copy of the mutated gene. Carriers of SLC22A5 gene mutations may have some signs and symptoms related to the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of primary carnitine deficiency:  - Baby's First Test  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Systemic Primary Carnitine Deficiency  - Genetic Testing Registry: Renal carnitine transport defect  - The Linus Pauling Institute: L-Carnitine   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care