Tarsal carpal coalition syndrome is a genetic condition characterized by fusion of the bones in the wrist (carpals), feet (tarsals), and the fingers and toes (phalanges). Other bone abnormalities in the hands and feet may be present. Approximately 10 affected families have been described. Tarsal carpal coalition syndrome is caused by mutations in the NOD gene, and it is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Tarsal carpal coalition syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the ankles 90% Short stature 90% Tarsal synostosis 90% Carpal synostosis 75% Proximal symphalangism (hands) 75% Radial deviation of finger 75% Short 1st metacarpal 75% Cubitus valgus 7.5% Distal symphalangism (hands) 7.5% Humeroradial synostosis 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Brachydactyly syndrome - Clinodactyly - Progressive fusion 2nd-5th pip joints - Short finger - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Synostoses, tarsal, carpal, and digital. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Anonychia - Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the middle phalanges of the hand - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Carpal synostosis - Metacarpophalangeal synostosis - Radial head subluxation - Short metacarpal - Tarsal synostosis - Underdeveloped nasal alae - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.