Carpenter syndrome is a condition characterized by premature fusion of skull bones (craniosynostosis); finger and toe abnormalities; and other developmental problems. The features in affected people vary. Craniosynostosis can give the head a pointed appearance; cause asymmetry of the head and face; affect the development of the brain; and cause characteristic facial features. Other signs and symptoms may include dental abnormalities; vision problems; hearing loss; heart defects; genital abnormalities; obesity; various skeletal abnormalities; and a range of intellectual disability. Carpenter syndrome can be caused by mutations in the RAB23 or MEGF8 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment focuses on the specific features in each affected person. Life expectancy is shortened but very variable.
Carpenter syndrome is thought to be a rare condition; approximately 70 cases have been described in the scientific literature.
Mutations in the RAB23 or MEGF8 gene cause Carpenter syndrome.  The RAB23 gene provides instructions for making a protein that is involved in a process called vesicle trafficking, which moves proteins and other molecules within cells in sac-like structures called vesicles. The Rab23 protein transports vesicles from the cell membrane to their proper location inside the cell. Vesicle trafficking is important for the transport of materials that are needed to trigger signaling during development. For example, the Rab23 protein regulates a developmental pathway called the hedgehog signaling pathway that is critical in cell growth (proliferation), cell specialization, and the normal shaping (patterning) of many parts of the body.  The MEGF8 gene provides instructions for making a protein whose function is unclear. Based on its structure, the Megf8 protein may be involved in cell processes such as sticking cells together (cell adhesion) and helping proteins interact with each other. Researchers also suspect that the Megf8 protein plays a role in normal body patterning.  Mutations in the RAB23 or MEGF8 gene lead to the production of proteins with little or no function. It is unclear how disruptions in protein function lead to the features of Carpenter syndrome, but it is likely that interference with normal body patterning plays a role. For reasons that are unknown, people with MEGF8 gene mutations are more likely to have dextrocardia and other organ positioning abnormalities and less severe craniosynostosis than individuals with RAB23 gene mutations.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Carpenter syndrome:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Carpenter syndrome 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Carpenter syndrome 2  - Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children (UK): Craniosynostosis Information  - Johns Hopkins Medicine: Craniosynostosis Treatment Options  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Craniosynostosis Repair  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Dextrocardia   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care