A Clouding of the Lens in the Eye A cataract is a clouding of the lens in the eye that affects vision. The lens is a clear part of the eye that helps to focus light, or an image, on the retina. The retina is the light-sensitive tissue at the back of the eye. In a normal eye, light passes through the transparent lens to the retina. Once it reaches the retina, light is changed into nerve signals that are sent to the brain. In a normal eye, light passes through the transparent lens to the retina. Once it reaches the retina, light is changed into nerve signals that are sent to the brain. A cataract can occur in either or both eyes. It cannot spread from one eye to the other. Cataracts and Aging Most cataracts are related to aging. Cataracts are very common in older people. By age 80, more than half of all Americans either have a cataract or have had cataract surgery.
Age-related cataracts develop in two ways. - Clumps of protein reduce the sharpness of the image reaching the retina.  - The clear lens slowly changes to a yellowish/brownish color, adding a brownish tint to vision. Clumps of protein reduce the sharpness of the image reaching the retina. The clear lens slowly changes to a yellowish/brownish color, adding a brownish tint to vision. Protein Clumpings Cloud the Lens The lens consists mostly of water and protein. When the protein clumps up, it clouds the lens and reduces the light that reaches the retina. The clouding may become severe enough to cause blurred vision. Most age-related cataracts develop from protein clumpings. When a cataract is small, the cloudiness affects only a small part of the lens. You may not notice any changes in your vision. Cataracts tend to grow slowly, so vision gets worse gradually. Over time, the cloudy area in the lens may get larger, and the cataract may increase in size. Seeing may become more difficult. Your vision may get duller or blurrier. Discoloration of the Lens Cataracts cause the lens to change to a yellowish/brownish color. As the clear lens slowly colors with age, your vision gradually may acquire a brownish shade. At first, the amount of tinting may be small and may not cause a vision problem. Over time, increased tinting may make it more difficult to read and perform other routine activities. This gradual change in the amount of tinting does not affect the sharpness of the image transmitted to the retina. If you have advanced lens discoloration, you may not be able to identify blues and purples. You may be wearing what you believe to be a pair of black socks, only to find out from friends that you are wearing purple socks. Risk Factors The risk of cataract increases as you get older. Other risk factors for cataract include - certain diseases like diabetes  - personal behavior like smoking or alcohol use  - environmental factors such as prolonged exposure to ultraviolet sunlight. certain diseases like diabetes personal behavior like smoking or alcohol use environmental factors such as prolonged exposure to ultraviolet sunlight.
Common Symptoms The most common symptoms of a cataract are - cloudy or blurry vision and poor night vision  - glare -- headlights, lamps, or sunlight may appear too bright or a halo may appear around lights  - double vision or multiple images in one eye  - frequent prescription changes in your eyeglasses or contact lenses. cloudy or blurry vision and poor night vision glare -- headlights, lamps, or sunlight may appear too bright or a halo may appear around lights double vision or multiple images in one eye frequent prescription changes in your eyeglasses or contact lenses. Tests for Cataract Cataract is detected through a comprehensive eye exam that includes a visual acuity test, dilated eye exam, and tonometry. Tests for Cataract - The visual acuity test is an eye chart test that measures how well you see at various distances.  - In the dilated eye exam, drops are placed in your eyes to widen, or dilate, the pupils. Your eye care professional uses a special magnifying lens to examine your retina and optic nerve for signs of damage and other eye problems.   - In tonometry, an instrument measures the pressure inside the eye. Numbing drops may be applied to your eye for this test. The visual acuity test is an eye chart test that measures how well you see at various distances. In the dilated eye exam, drops are placed in your eyes to widen, or dilate, the pupils. Your eye care professional uses a special magnifying lens to examine your retina and optic nerve for signs of damage and other eye problems. In tonometry, an instrument measures the pressure inside the eye. Numbing drops may be applied to your eye for this test. Dealing with Symptoms The symptoms of early cataract may be improved with new eyeglasses, brighter lighting, anti-glare sunglasses, or magnifying lenses. If these measures do not help, surgery is the only effective treatment. Surgery involves removing the cloudy lens and replacing it with an artificial lens.
The symptoms of early cataract may be improved with new eyeglasses, brighter lighting, anti-glare sunglasses, or magnifying lenses. If these measures do not help, surgery is the only effective treatment. Surgery involves removing the cloudy lens and replacing it with an artificial lens.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Cataract and cardiomyopathy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Cataract 90% Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 90% Myopathy 90% Nystagmus 90% Strabismus 90% Myopia 50% Abnormal electroretinogram 7.5% Corneal dystrophy 7.5% Glaucoma 7.5% Thrombocytopenia 5% 3-Methylglutaconic aciduria - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Congenital cataract - Easy fatigability - Exercise intolerance - Exercise-induced lactic acidemia - Fatigue - Growth delay - Increased serum lactate - Infantile onset - Mitochondrial myopathy - Motor delay - Muscle weakness - Muscular hypotonia - Respiratory insufficiency - Variable expressivity - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Cerulean cataracts are opaque areas that develop in the lens of the eye that often have a bluish or whitish color. They may be present at birth or develop in very early childhood, but may not be diagnosed until adulthood. They are usually bilateral and progressive. Infants can be asymptomatic, but may also be visually impaired from birth and develop nystagmus and amblyopia. In adulthood, the cataracts may progress, making lens removal necessary. Cerulean cataracts may be caused by mutations in several genes, including the CRYBB2, CRYGD, and MAF genes, and are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. No treatment is known to prevent cerulean cataracts, but frequent evaluations and cataract surgery are typically required to prevent amblyopia as the opacities progress.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Cerulean cataract. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Cerulean cataract 100% Macular hypoplasia 5% Retinal detachment 5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Congenital cataract - Cortical pulverulent cataract - Iris coloboma - Microcornea - Sutural cataract - Visual loss - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 No treatment is known to prevent cerulean cataracts, and there is currently no cure for the condition. Frequent eye evaluations and eventual cataract surgery are typically required to prevent amblyopia (vision loss) as the opacities progress. The symptoms of early cataracts may be improved with new eyeglasses, brighter lighting, anti-glare sunglasses, or magnifying lenses. However, if these measures do not help, surgery is often the only effective treatment. Surgery involves removing the cloudy lens and replacing it with an artificial lens. Surgery is often considered when vision loss regularly interferes with everyday activities, such as driving, reading, or watching TV.