Caudal regression syndrome is estimated to occur in 1 to 2.5 per 100,000 newborns. This condition is much more common in infants born to mothers with diabetes when it affects an estimated 1 in 350 newborns.
Caudal regression syndrome is a complex condition that may have different causes in different people. The condition is likely caused by the interaction of multiple genetic and environmental factors. One risk factor for the development of caudal regression syndrome is the presence of diabetes in the mother. It is thought that increased blood sugar levels and other metabolic problems related to diabetes may have a harmful effect on a developing fetus, increasing the likelihood of developing caudal regression syndrome. The risks to the fetus are further increased if the mother's diabetes is poorly managed. Caudal regression syndrome also occurs in infants of non-diabetic mothers, so researchers are trying to identify other factors that contribute to the development of this complex disorder.  Some researchers believe that a disruption of fetal development around day 28 of pregnancy causes caudal regression syndrome. The developmental problem is thought to affect the middle layer of embryonic tissue known as the mesoderm. Disruption of normal mesoderm development impairs normal formation of parts of the skeleton, gastrointestinal system, and genitourinary system.  Other researchers think that caudal regression syndrome results from the presence of an abnormal artery in the abdomen, which diverts blood flow away from the lower areas of the developing fetus. Decreased blood flow to these areas is thought to interfere with their development and result in the signs and symptoms of caudal regression syndrome.  Some scientists believe that the abnormal development of the mesoderm causes the reduction of blood flow, while other scientists believe that the reduction in blood flow causes the abnormal mesoderm development. Many scientists think that the cause of caudal regression syndrome is a combination of abnormal mesoderm development and decreased blood flow to the caudal areas of the fetus.
Caudal regression syndrome occurs sporadically, which means it occurs in people with no history of the condition in their family. Multiple genetic and environmental factors likely play a part in determining the risk of developing this condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of caudal regression syndrome:  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Bladder Exstrophy Repair  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Clubfoot  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Inguinal Hernia Repair  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Neurogenic Bladder   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care