Celiac disease is an immune disease in which people can't eat gluten because it will damage their small intestine. If you have celiac disease and eat foods with gluten, your immune system responds by damaging the small intestine. Gluten is a protein found in wheat, rye, and barley. It is found mainly in foods but may also be in other products like medicines, vitamins and supplements, lip balm, and even the glue on stamps and envelopes.    Celiac disease affects each person differently. Symptoms may occur in the digestive system, or in other parts of the body. One person might have diarrhea and abdominal pain, while another person may be irritable or depressed. Irritability is one of the most common symptoms in children. Some people have no symptoms.    Celiac disease is genetic. Blood tests can help your doctor diagnose the disease. Your doctor may also need to examine a small piece of tissue from your small intestine. Treatment is a diet free of gluten.     NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
Celiac disease is a common disorder. Its prevalence has been estimated at about 1 in 100 people worldwide.
The risk of developing celiac disease is increased by certain variants of the HLA-DQA1 and HLA-DQB1 genes. These genes provide instructions for making proteins that play a critical role in the immune system. The HLA-DQA1 and HLA-DQB1 genes belong to a family of genes called the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) complex. The HLA complex helps the immune system distinguish the body's own proteins from proteins made by foreign invaders such as viruses and bacteria.  The proteins produced from the HLA-DQA1 and HLA-DQB1 genes attach (bind) to each other to form a functional protein complex called an antigen-binding DQ heterodimer. This complex, which is present on the surface of certain immune system cells, attaches to protein fragments (peptides) outside the cell. If the immune system recognizes the peptides as foreign (such as viral or bacterial peptides), it triggers a response to attack the invading viruses or bacteria.  Celiac disease is associated with an inappropriate immune response to a segment of the gluten protein called gliadin. This inappropriate activation of the immune system causes inflammation that damages the body's organs and tissues and leads to the signs and symptoms of celiac disease.  Almost all people with celiac disease have specific variants of the HLA-DQA1 and HLA-DQB1 genes, which seem to increase the risk of an inappropriate immune response to gliadin. However, these variants are also found in 30 percent of the general population, and only 3 percent of individuals with the gene variants develop celiac disease.  It appears likely that other contributors, such as environmental factors and changes in other genes, also influence the development of this complex disorder.
Celiac disease tends to cluster in families. Parents, siblings, or children (first-degree relatives) of people with celiac disease have between a 4 and 15 percent chance of developing the disorder. However, the inheritance pattern is unknown.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of celiac disease:  - Beth Israel Deaconess: Celiac Center  - Columbia University Celiac Disease Center  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Celiac Disease  - Genetic Testing Registry: Celiac disease  - Massachusetts General Hospital Center for Celiac Research and Treatment  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Celiac Disease Nutritional Considerations  - North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition: Gluten-Free Diet Guide  - University of Chicago Celiac Disease Center   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Researchers do not know the exact cause of celiac disease. Celiac disease sometimes runs in families. In 50 percent of people who have celiac disease, a family member, when screened, also has the disease.1
                
A person's chances of developing celiac disease increase when his or her genestraits passed from parent to childhave variants, or changes. In celiac disease, certain gene variants and other factors, such as a person's exposure to things in his or her environment, can lead to celiac disease. Read more about genes and genetic conditions at www.ghr.nlm.nih.gov.
                
For most people, eating something with gluten is harmless. For others, an exposure to gluten can cause, or trigger, celiac disease to become active. Sometimes surgery, pregnancy, childbirth, a viral infection, or severe emotional stress can also trigger celiac disease symptoms.
As many as one in 141 Americans has celiac disease, although most remain undiagnosed.2 Celiac disease affects children and adults in all parts of the world and is more common in Caucasians and females.
                
Celiac disease is also more common among people with certain genetic diseases, including Down syndrome and Turner syndromea condition that affects girls' development.
Signs and symptoms of celiac disease vary from person to person because of numerous factors, including
                
- the length of time a person was breastfed as an infant; some studies have shown that the longer an infant was breastfed, the later the symptoms of celiac disease appear  - the age a person started eating gluten  - the amount of gluten a person eats  - agesymptoms can vary between young children and adults  - the degree of damage to the small intestine
                
Some people with celiac disease have no signs or symptoms; however, they can still develop complications of the disease over time. Long-term complications include
                
- malnutrition  - liver diseases  - intestinal cancer  - lymphoma
In some cases, a health care provider will order genetic blood tests to confirm or rule out a diagnosis of celiac disease. Most people with celiac disease have gene pairs that contain at least one of the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) gene variants.4 However, these variants are also common in people without celiac disease, so their presence alone cannot diagnose celiac disease.
                
If a biopsy and other blood tests do not give a clear diagnosis of celiac disease, a health care provider may test a patient for HLA gene variants. If the gene variants are not present, celiac disease is unlikely.
- Celiac disease is an immune disorder in which people cannot tolerate gluten because it damages the lining of their small intestine and prevents absorption of nutrients.  - When people with celiac disease eat foods or use products containing gluten, their immune system responds by damaging or destroying villithe tiny, fingerlike projections on the inner lining of the small intestine.  - A person may experience digestive signs and symptoms, or symptoms in other parts of the body.  - Recognizing celiac disease can be difficult because some of its symptoms are similar to those of other diseases and conditions.  - Dermatitis herpetiformis is a chronic, itchy, blistering skin rashusually on the elbows, knees, buttocks, back, or scalpthat affects about 5 to 10 percent of people with celiac disease.  - Signs and symptoms of celiac disease vary from person to person because of numerous factors.  - Some people with celiac disease have no signs or symptoms; however, they can still develop complications of the disease over time. Long-term complications include malnutrition, liver diseases, intestinal cancer, and lymphoma.  - A health care provider diagnoses celiac disease with a medical and family history, a physical exam, blood tests, an intestinal biopsy, and a skin biopsy.  - Since celiac disease sometimes runs in families, blood relatives of people with celiac disease should talk with their health care provider about their chances of getting the disease.  - Most people with celiac disease have a significant improvement in symptoms when they follow a gluten-free diet.  - Health care providers typically refer people to a dietitian who specializes in treating people with the disease.  - The dietitian will give the person instructions for how to read food and product labels and identify ingredients that contain gluten.  - Medications, supplements, and other products may also contain a hidden source of gluten.  - People with celiac disease can eat a wellbalanced diet with a variety of foods.