Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS) is a disorder of the autonomic nervous system that affects breathing. It causes a person to hypoventilate (especially during sleep), resulting in a shortage of oxygen and a buildup of carbon dioxide in the blood. Symptoms usually begin shortly after birth. Affected infants hypoventilate upon falling asleep and exhibit a bluish appearance of the skin or lips (cyanosis). Other features may include difficulty regulating heart rate and blood pressure; decreased perception of pain; low body temperature; sporadic profuse sweating; Hirschsprung disease; constipation; learning difficulties; eye abnormalities; and a characteristic facial appearance (having a short, wide, somewhat flattened face). CCHS is caused by a mutation in the PHOX2B gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. However, over 90% of cases are due to a new mutation in the affected person and are not inherited from a parent. Treatment typically includes mechanical ventilation or use of a diaphragm pacemaker.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Aganglionic megacolon 90% Apnea 90% Respiratory insufficiency 90% Short stature 90% Strabismus 90% Cognitive impairment 50% Muscular hypotonia 50% Seizures 50% Neuroblastoma 7.5% Oligohydramnios 7.5% Polyhydramnios 7.5% Prenatal movement abnormality 7.5% Sensorineural hearing impairment 7.5% Abnormality of temperature regulation - Abnormality of the cardiovascular system - Abnormality of the mouth - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Central hypoventilation - Constipation - Feeding difficulties - Ganglioneuroblastoma - Ganglioneuroma - Hyperhidrosis - Low-set ears - Posteriorly rotated ears - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
How  Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS) is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that having a change (mutation) in only one copy of the responsible gene in each cell is enough to cause features of the condition. The genetics of CCHS can be complex. Most people with CCHS have a new (de novo) mutation in the responsible gene (the PHOX2B gene). De novo mutations occur for the first time in the affected person and are not inherited from a parent. Some people with CCHS have a parent with the condition, and inherit the mutation from that parent. In some cases, an asymptomatic parent of a person with symptoms has a PHOX2B mutation in some of their germ cells (egg or sperm cells, not body cells). This is called germline mosaicism. Some of these parents also have a PHOX2B mutation in some of their body cells. This is called somatic mosaicism. Germline mosaicism with or without somatic mosaicism is present in about 25% of asymptomatic parents of people with CCHS. Parents with mosaicism should have a comprehensive assessment to determine if any features of CCHS are present. It is also recommended that parents of a person with a presumed de novo mutation have genetic testing for the presence of the mutation, including testing that detects mosaicism at low levels.
Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS) is a disorder that affects breathing. People with this disorder take shallow breaths (hypoventilate), especially during sleep, resulting in a shortage of oxygen and a buildup of carbon dioxide in the blood. Ordinarily, the part of the nervous system that controls involuntary body processes (autonomic nervous system) would react to such an imbalance by stimulating the individual to breathe more deeply or wake up. This reaction is impaired in people with CCHS, and they must be supported with a machine to help them breathe (mechanical ventilation) or a device that stimulates a normal breathing pattern (diaphragm pacemaker). Some affected individuals need this support 24 hours a day, while others need it only at night.  Symptoms of CCHS usually become apparent shortly after birth. Affected infants hypoventilate upon falling asleep and exhibit a bluish appearance of the skin or lips (cyanosis). Cyanosis is caused by lack of oxygen in the blood. In some milder cases, CCHS may be diagnosed later in life. In addition to the breathing problem, people with this disorder may have difficulty regulating their heart rate and blood pressure, for example in response to exercise or changes in body position. They may have abnormalities in the nerves that control the digestive tract (Hirschsprung disease), resulting in severe constipation, intestinal blockage, and enlargement of the colon. They are also at increased risk of developing certain tumors of the nervous system called neuroblastomas, ganglioneuromas, and ganglioneuroblastomas. Some affected individuals develop learning difficulties or other neurological problems, which may be worsened by oxygen deprivation if treatment to support their breathing is not completely effective.  Individuals with CCHS usually have eye abnormalities, including a decreased response of the pupils to light. They also have decreased perception of pain, low body temperature, and occasional episodes of profuse sweating.  People with CCHS, especially children, may have a characteristic appearance with a short, wide, somewhat flattened face often described as "box-shaped." Life expectancy and the extent of any cognitive disabilities depend on the severity of the disorder, timing of the diagnosis, and the success of treatment.
CCHS is a relatively rare disorder. Approximately 1,000 individuals with this condition have been identified. Researchers believe that some cases of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) or sudden unexplained death in children may be caused by undiagnosed CCHS.
Mutations in the PHOX2B gene cause CCHS. The PHOX2B gene provides instructions for making a protein that acts early in development to help promote the formation of nerve cells (neurons) and regulate the process by which the neurons mature to carry out specific functions (differentiation). The protein is active in the neural crest, which is a group of cells in the early embryo that give rise to many tissues and organs. Neural crest cells migrate to form parts of the autonomic nervous system, many tissues in the face and skull, and other tissue and cell types.  Mutations are believed to interfere with the PHOX2B protein's role in promoting neuron formation and differentiation, especially in the autonomic nervous system, resulting in the problems regulating breathing and other body functions that occur in CCHS.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  More than 90 percent of cases of CCHS result from new mutations in the PHOX2B gene. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Occasionally an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. The number of such cases has been increasing as better treatment has allowed more affected individuals to live into adulthood.  About 5 to 10 percent of affected individuals inherit the mutation from a seemingly unaffected parent with somatic mosaicism. Somatic mosaicism means that some of the body's cells have a PHOX2B gene mutation, and others do not. A parent with mosaicism for a PHOX2B gene mutation may not show any signs or symptoms of CCHS.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of CCHS:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Congenital Central Hypoventilation Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital central hypoventilation  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hirschsprung's Disease   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care