Key Points
                    - Central nervous system atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the brain.    - Certain genetic changes may increase the risk of atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor.    - The signs and symptoms of atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor are not the same in every patient.    - Tests that examine the brain and spinal cord are used to detect (find) CNS atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor.    - Childhood atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor is diagnosed and may be removed in surgery.    - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options.
                
                
                    Central nervous system atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the brain.
                    Central nervous system (CNS) atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor (AT/RT) is a very rare, fast-growing tumor of the brain and spinal cord. It usually occurs in children aged three years and younger, although it can occur in older children and adults.    About half of these tumors form in the cerebellum or brain stem. The cerebellum is the part of the brain that controls movement, balance, and posture. The brain stem controls breathing, heart rate, and the nerves and muscles used in seeing, hearing, walking, talking, and eating. AT/RT may also be found in other parts of the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord).    This summary describes the treatment of primary brain tumors (tumors that begin in the brain). Treatment for metastatic brain tumors, which are tumors formed by cancer cells that begin in other parts of the body and spread to the brain, is not covered in this summary. For more information, see the PDQ summary on Childhood Brain and Spinal Cord Tumors Treatment Overview about the different types of childhood brain and spinal cord tumors.   Brain tumors can occur in both children and adults; however, treatment for children may be different than treatment for adults. See the PDQ treatment summary on Adult Central Nervous System Tumors Treatment for more information.
Certain genetic changes may increase the risk of atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor. Anything that increases the risk of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesnt mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your child's doctor if you think your child may be at risk.   Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor may be linked to changes in the tumor suppressor genes SMARCB1 or SMARCA4. Genes of this type make a protein that helps control cell growth. Changes in the DNA of tumor suppressor genes like SMARCB1 or SMARCA4 may lead to cancer.   Changes in the SMARCB1 or SMARCA4 genes may be inherited (passed on from parents to offspring). When this gene change is inherited, tumors may form in two parts of the body at the same time (for example, in the brain and the kidney). For patients with AT/RT, genetic counseling (a discussion with a trained professional about inherited diseases and a possible need for gene testing) may be recommended.
The signs and symptoms of atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor are not the same in every patient. Signs and symptoms depend on the following:         - The child's age.    - Where the tumor has formed.        Because atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor is fast growing, signs and symptoms may develop quickly and get worse over a period of days or weeks. Signs and symptoms may be caused by AT/RT or by other conditions. Check with your child's doctor if your child has any of the following:         - Morning headache or headache that goes away after vomiting.    -  Nausea and vomiting.    - Unusual sleepiness or change in activity level.    - Loss of balance, lack of coordination, or trouble walking.    - Increase in head size (in infants).
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following:         - Whether there are certain inherited gene changes.    - The age of the child.    - The amount of tumor remaining after surgery.    - Whether the cancer has spread to other parts of the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord) or to the kidney at the time of diagnosis.
Key Points
                    - There is no standard staging system for central nervous system atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor.
                
                
                    There is no standard staging system for central nervous system atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor.
                    The extent or spread of cancer is usually described as stages. There is no standard staging system for central nervous system atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor.    For treatment, this tumor is grouped as newly diagnosed or recurrent. Treatment depends on the following:         - The age of the child.    - How much cancer remains after surgery to remove the tumor.        Results from the following procedure are also used to plan treatment:         -   Ultrasound exam: A procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs, such as the kidney, and make echoes. The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. The picture can be printed to be looked at later. This procedure is done to check for tumors that may also have formed in the kidney.
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials.
                    This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website.     Targeted therapy     Targeted therapy is a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances to attack specific cancer cells. Targeted therapies usually cause less harm to normal cells than chemotherapy or radiation therapy do. Targeted therapy is being studied in the treatment of recurrent childhood central nervous system atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor.
                
                
                    Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial.
                    For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment.   Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment.   Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward.
                
                
                    Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment.
                    Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment.   Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.