Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis 7 (CLN7-NCL) is a rare condition that affects the nervous system. Signs and symptoms of the condition generally develop in early childhood (average age 5 years) and may include loss of muscle coordination (ataxia), seizures that do not respond to medications, muscle twitches (myoclonus), visual impairment, and developmental regression (the loss of previously acquired skills). CLN7-NCL is caused by changes (mutations) in the MFSD8 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment options are limited to therapies that can help relieve some of the symptoms.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis 7. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Ataxia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Blindness - Cerebellar atrophy - Cerebral atrophy - Delayed speech and language development - EEG abnormality - Generalized myoclonic seizures - Juvenile onset - Mental deterioration - Neurodegeneration - Optic atrophy - Pigmentary retinopathy - Rapidly progressive - Retinopathy - Sleep disturbance - Visual loss - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Adult neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis is a rare condition that affects the nervous system. Signs and symptoms usually begin around age 30, but they can develop anytime between adolescence and late adulthood. There are two forms of adult neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis that are differentiated by their underlying genetic cause, mode of inheritance and certain symptoms: Type A is characterized by a combination of seizures and uncontrollable muscle jerks (myoclonic epilepsy); dementia; difficulties with muscle coordination (ataxia); involuntary movements such as tremors or tics; and dysarthria. It is caused by changes (mutations) in the CLN6 or PPT1 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Type B shares many features with type A; however, affected people also experience behavioral abnormalities and do not develop myoclonic epilepsy or dysarthria. It can be caused by mutations in the DNAJC5 or CTSF gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Treatment options for adult neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis are limited to therapies that can help relieve some of the symptoms.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Adult neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal pyramidal signs 90% Abnormality of extrapyramidal motor function 90% Behavioral abnormality 90% Developmental regression 90% Incoordination 90% Involuntary movements 90% Seizures 90% Retinopathy 7.5% Visual impairment 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Ceroid lipofuscinosis neuronal 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of metabolism/homeostasis - Ataxia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Blindness - Cerebral atrophy - Decreased light- and dark-adapted electroretinogram amplitude - Depression - EEG abnormality - Flexion contracture - Hallucinations - Increased neuronal autofluorescent lipopigment - Intellectual disability - Irritability - Loss of speech - Macular degeneration - Muscular hypotonia - Myoclonus - Onset - Optic atrophy - Postnatal microcephaly - Progressive microcephaly - Progressive visual loss - Psychomotor deterioration - Retinal degeneration - Seizures - Sleep disturbance - Spasticity - Undetectable electroretinogram - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis 10 (CLN10-NCL) is a rare condition that affects the nervous system. Signs and symptoms of the condition can develop any time from birth to adulthood and may include progressive dementia, seizures, lack of muscle coordination, and vision loss. CLN10-NCL is caused by changes (mutations) in the CTSD gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment options are limited to therapies that can help relieve some of the symptoms.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis 10 . If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Microcephaly 90% Respiratory insufficiency 90% Seizures 90% Abnormality of metabolism/homeostasis - Apnea - Ataxia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cerebellar atrophy - Cerebral atrophy - Congenital onset - Increased neuronal autofluorescent lipopigment - Intellectual disability, progressive - Intellectual disability, severe - Low-set ears - Neuronal loss in central nervous system - Premature closure of fontanelles - Respiratory failure - Retinal atrophy - Rigidity - Rod-cone dystrophy - Sloping forehead - Spasticity - Status epilepticus - Visual loss - Wide nasal bridge - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis 9 (CLN9-NCL) is a rare condition that affects the nervous system. Signs and symptoms of the condition generally develop in early childhood (average age 4 years) and may include loss of muscle coordination (ataxia), seizures that do not respond to medications, muscle twitches (myoclonus), visual impairment, and developmental regression (the loss of previously acquired skills). The underlying genetic cause of CLN9-NCL is unknown but it appears to be inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment options are limited to therapies that can help relieve some of the symptoms.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis 9. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Ataxia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cerebral atrophy - Curvilinear intracellular accumulation of autofluorescent lipopigment storage material - Death in childhood - Decreased light- and dark-adapted electroretinogram amplitude - Dysarthria - Fingerprint intracellular accumulation of autofluorescent lipopigment storage material - Intellectual disability - Mutism - Optic atrophy - Progressive inability to walk - Progressive visual loss - Psychomotor deterioration - Rigidity - Rod-cone dystrophy - Scanning speech - Seizures - Vacuolated lymphocytes - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis 5 (CLN5-NCL) is a rare condition that affects the nervous system. Signs and symptoms of the condition generally develop between ages 4.5 and 7 years, although later onset cases have been reported. Affected people may experience loss of muscle coordination (ataxia), seizures that do not respond to medications, muscle twitches (myoclonus), visual impairment, and cognitive/motor decline. It occurs predominantly in the Finnish population. CLN5-NCL is caused by changes (mutations) in the CLN5 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment options are limited to therapies that can help relieve some of the symptoms.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis 5. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Cerebellar atrophy 5% Dysarthria 5% Dysdiadochokinesis 5% Dysmetria 5% Nystagmus 5% Abnormal nervous system electrophysiology - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Clumsiness - Curvilinear intracellular accumulation of autofluorescent lipopigment storage material - Developmental regression - Fingerprint intracellular accumulation of autofluorescent lipopigment storage material - Increased neuronal autofluorescent lipopigment - Intellectual disability - Motor deterioration - Myoclonus - Progressive visual loss - Rectilinear intracellular accumulation of autofluorescent lipopigment storage material - Retinal degeneration - Seizures - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (NCL) refers to a group of conditions that affect the nervous system. Signs and symptoms vary widely between the forms but generally include a combination of dementia, vision loss, and epilepsy. Although the NCLs were historically classified according to their age of onset and clinical features, the most recent classification system is primarily based on their underlying genetic cause. Most forms are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner; however, autosomal dominant inheritance has been reported in one adult-onset form (neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis 4B). Treatment options are limited to therapies that can help relieve some of the symptoms.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal electroretinogram 90% Abnormality of the retinal vasculature 90% Cognitive impairment 90% EEG abnormality 90% Muscular hypotonia 90% Ocular albinism 90% Seizures 90% Visual impairment 90% Abnormality of metabolism/homeostasis 50% Abnormality of movement 50% Developmental regression 50% Neurological speech impairment 50% Optic atrophy 50% Behavioral abnormality 7.5% Incoordination 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Autosomal dominant neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis 4B is a form of adult neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, which is a rare condition that affects the nervous system. Signs and symptoms usually begin around age 30, but they can develop anytime between adolescence and late adulthood. Affected people generally experience behavioral abnormalities, dementia; difficulties with muscle coordination (ataxia); and involuntary movements such as tremors or tics. It can be caused by changes (mutations) in the DNAJC5 or CTSF gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Treatment options are limited to therapies that can help relieve some of the symptoms.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Autosomal dominant neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis 4B. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Adult onset - Ataxia - Auditory hallucinations - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Curvilinear intracellular accumulation of autofluorescent lipopigment storage material - Dementia - Depression - Fingerprint intracellular accumulation of autofluorescent lipopigment storage material - Granular osmiophilic deposits (GROD) in cells - Increased neuronal autofluorescent lipopigment - Myoclonus - Parkinsonism - Rapidly progressive - Rectilinear intracellular accumulation of autofluorescent lipopigment storage material - Seizures - Visual hallucinations - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (NCL) is an inherited disorder that primarily affects the nervous system. Beginning in infancy, children with this condition have intellectual and motor disability, rarely developing the ability to speak or walk. Affected children often have muscle twitches (myoclonus), recurrent seizures (epilepsy), or vision impairment. An unusually small head (microcephaly) and progressive loss of nerve cells in the brain are also characteristic features of this disorder. Children with infantile NCL usually do not survive past childhood.  Infantile NCL is one of a group of NCLs (collectively called Batten disease) that affect the nervous system and typically cause progressive problems with vision, movement, and thinking ability. The different types of NCLs are distinguished by the age at which signs and symptoms first appear.
The incidence of infantile NCL is unknown. Collectively, all forms of NCL affect an estimated 1 in 100,000 individuals worldwide. NCLs are more common in Finland, where approximately 1 in 12,500 individuals are affected.
Mutations in the PPT1 gene cause most cases of infantile NCL. The PPT1 gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called palmitoyl-protein thioesterase 1. This enzyme is active in cell compartments called lysosomes, which digest and recycle different types of molecules. Palmitoyl-protein thioesterase 1 removes certain fats called long-chain fatty acids from proteins, which probably helps break down the proteins. Palmitoyl-protein thioesterase 1 is also thought to be involved in a variety of other cell functions.  PPT1 gene mutations that cause infantile NCL decrease the production or function of palmitoyl-protein thioesterase 1. A shortage of functional enzyme impairs the removal of fatty acids from proteins. In the lysosomes, these fats and proteins accumulate as fatty substances called lipopigments. These accumulations occur in cells throughout the body, but nerve cells in the brain seem to be particularly vulnerable to the damage caused by buildup of lipopigments and the loss of enzyme function. The progressive death of cells, especially in the brain, leads to the signs and symptoms of infantile NCL.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Ceroid lipofuscinosis neuronal 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Late-infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (NCL) is an inherited disorder that primarily affects the nervous system. The signs and symptoms of this condition typically begin in late infancy or early childhood. The initial features usually include recurrent seizures (epilepsy) and difficulty coordinating movements (ataxia). Affected children also develop muscle twitches (myoclonus) and vision impairment. Late-infantile NCL affects motor skills, such as sitting and walking, and speech development. This condition also causes the loss of previously acquired skills (developmental regression), progressive intellectual disability, and behavioral problems. Individuals with this condition often require the use of a wheelchair by late childhood and typically do not survive past their teens.  Late-infantile NCL is one of a group of NCLs (collectively called Batten disease) that affect the nervous system and typically cause progressive problems with vision, movement, and thinking ability. The different types of NCLs are distinguished by the age at which signs and symptoms first appear.
The prevalence of late-infantile NCL is unknown. Collectively, all forms of NCL affect an estimated 1 in 100,000 individuals worldwide. NCLs are more common in Finland, where approximately 1 in 12,500 individuals are affected.
Mutations in the TPP1 gene cause most cases of late-infantile NCL. Mutations in the CLN5, CLN6, CLN8, MFSD8, and PPT1 genes each account for a small percentage of cases.  The TPP1 gene produces an enzyme called tripeptidyl peptidase 1. This enzyme is found in cell structures called lysosomes, which digest and recycle different types of molecules. Tripeptidyl peptidase 1 breaks down protein fragments, known as peptides, into their individual building blocks (amino acids).  The proteins produced from the other genes involved in this condition are active either in lysosomes or in another cell compartment called the endoplasmic reticulum. The endoplasmic reticulum is involved in protein production, processing, and transport. Within these cell structures, the proteins largely play roles in the breakdown of other proteins or substances.  Mutations in the TPP1, CLN5, CLN6, CLN8, MFSD8, or PPT1 gene usually reduce the production or activity of the particular protein or enzyme made from the gene. In many cases, a reduction in functional protein or enzyme results in incomplete breakdown of certain proteins and other materials. These materials accumulate in the lysosome forming fatty substances called lipopigments. In some cases, it is unclear what causes the buildup of lipopigments. In late-infantile NCL, these accumulations occur in cells throughout the body, but neurons seem particularly vulnerable to damage caused by lipopigments and a decrease in specific protein function. The progressive death of cells in the brain and other tissues leads to the signs and symptoms of late-infantile NCL.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of late-infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Neuronal Ceroid-Lipofuscinoses  - Genetic Testing Registry: Ceroid lipofuscinosis neuronal 5  - Genetic Testing Registry: Ceroid lipofuscinosis neuronal 6  - Genetic Testing Registry: Ceroid lipofuscinosis neuronal 7  - Genetic Testing Registry: Ceroid lipofuscinosis neuronal 8  - Genetic Testing Registry: Late-infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis  - Genetic Testing Registry: Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Congenital neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (NCL) is an inherited disorder that primarily affects the nervous system. Soon after birth, affected infants develop muscle rigidity, respiratory failure, and prolonged episodes of seizure activity that last several minutes (status epilepticus). It is likely that some affected individuals have seizure activity before birth. Infants with congenital NCL have unusually small heads (microcephaly) with brains that may be less than half the normal size. There is a loss of brain cells in areas that coordinate movement and control thinking and emotions (the cerebellum and the cerebral cortex). Affected individuals also lack a fatty substance called myelin, which protects nerve cells and promotes efficient transmission of nerve impulses. Infants with congenital NCL often die hours to weeks after birth.  Congenital NCL is the most severe form of a group of NCLs (collectively called Batten disease) that affect the nervous system and typically cause progressive problems with vision, movement, and thinking ability. The different types of NCLs are distinguished by the age at which signs and symptoms first appear.
Congenital NCL is the rarest type of NCL; approximately 10 cases have been described.
Mutations in the CTSD gene cause congenital NCL. The CTSD gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called cathepsin D. Cathepsin D is one of a family of cathepsin proteins that act as proteases, which modify proteins by cutting them apart. Cathepsin D is found in many types of cells and is active in lysosomes, which are compartments within cells that digest and recycle different types of molecules. By cutting proteins apart, cathepsin D can break proteins down, turn on (activate) proteins, and regulate self-destruction of the cell (apoptosis).  CTSD gene mutations that cause congenital NCL lead to a complete lack of cathepsin D enzyme activity. As a result, proteins and other materials are not broken down properly. In the lysosomes, these materials accumulate into fatty substances called lipopigments. These accumulations occur in cells throughout the body, but neurons are likely particularly vulnerable to damage caused by the abnormal cell materials and the loss of cathepsin D function. Early and widespread cell death in congenital NCL leads to severe signs and symptoms and death in infancy.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of congenital neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, congenital   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care