Chickenpox is an infection caused by the varicella-zoster virus. Most cases are in children under age 15, but older children and adults can get it. It spreads very easily from one person to another.    The classic symptom of chickenpox is an uncomfortable, itchy rash. The rash turns into fluid-filled blisters and eventually into scabs. It usually shows up on the face, chest, and back and then spreads to the rest of the body. Other symptoms include       - Fever    - Headache    - Tiredness    - Loss of appetite       Chickenpox is usually mild and lasts 5 to 10 days. Calamine lotions and oatmeal baths can help with itching. Acetaminophen can treat the fever. Do not use aspirin for chickenpox; that combination can cause Reye syndrome.    Chickenpox can sometimes cause serious problems. Adults, babies, teenagers, pregnant women, and those with weak immune systems tend to get sicker from it. They may need to take antiviral medicines.    Once you catch chickenpox, the virus usually stays in your body. You probably will not get chickenpox again, but the virus can cause shingles in adults. A chickenpox vaccine can help prevent most cases of chickenpox, or make it less severe if you do get it.    Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
At a Glance 
 
Vaccine-preventable disease levels are at or near record lows. Even though most infants and toddlers have received all recommended vaccines by age 2, many under-immunized children remain, leaving the potential for outbreaks of disease. Many adolescents and adults are under-immunized as well, missing opportunities to protect themselves against diseases such as Hepatitis B, influenza, and pneumococcal disease. CDC works closely with public health agencies and private partners to improve and sustain immunization coverage and to monitor the safety of vaccines so that this public health success story can be maintained and expanded in the century to come.  
  
 Vaccine Shortages & Delays 
  
   
   
 
   
  
  
   
   
The latest national information about vaccine supplies and guidance for healthcare providers who are facing vaccine shortages or delays 
     
    
   
  
  
 
  
  
  
 Potential New Vaccines 
  
   
   
 
   
  
  
   
   
Resources for finding information on potential vaccines, research and development status, licensure status, etc. 
       
    
   
  
  
 
  
  
  
 Vaccines: The Basics 
  
   
   
 
   
  
  
   
   
Without vaccines, epidemics of many preventable diseases could return, resulting in increased – and unnecessary – illness, disability, and death. 
          
    
   
  
  
 
  
  
  
 FAQ about Vaccines & Diseases they Prevent 
  
   
   
 
   
  
  
   
          
    
   
  
  
 
  
  
   
  
                
 
                
 
 
 
                
  
 
  
  
Images and logos on this website which are trademarked/copyrighted or used with permission of the trademark/copyright or logo holder are not in the public domain. These images and logos have been licensed for or used with permission in the materials provided on this website. The materials in the form presented on this website may be used without seeking further permission. Any other use of trademarked/copyrighted images or logos requires permission from the trademark/copyright holder...more 
  
  
  
  This graphic notice means that you are leaving an HHS Web site. For more information, please see the Exit Notification and Disclaimer policy.