Benign hereditary chorea (BHC) is a rare movement disorder that begins in infancy or childhood. Signs and symptoms in infants may include low muscle tone, involuntary movements (chorea), lung infections, and respiratory distress. Signs and symptoms in children may include delayed motor and walking milestones, jerky muscle movements (myoclonus), upper limb dystonia, motor tics, and vocal tics. The chorea often improves with time. In some cases, myoclonus persists or worsens. Children with BHC can have normal intellect, but may have learning and behavior problems. Other signs and symptoms include thyroid problems (e.g., hypothyroidism) and lung disease (e.g., recurring infections). Treatment is tailored to each child. Tetrabenazine and levodopa have been tried in individual cases with some success. BHC is caused by mutations in the NKX2-1 gene (also known as the TITF1 gene). It is passed through families in an autosomal dominant fashion.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Benign hereditary chorea. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Gait disturbance 90% Dysarthria 7.5% Anxiety - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Chorea - Juvenile onset - Motor delay - Phenotypic variability - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Chorea is an abnormal involuntary movement disorder, one of a group of neurological disorders called dyskinesias, which are caused by overactivity of the neurotransmitter dopamine in the areas of the brain that control movement. Chorea is characterized by brief, irregular contractions that are not repetitive or rhythmic, but appear to flow from one muscle to the next. Chorea often occurs with athetosis, which adds twisting and writhing movements. Chorea is a primary feature of Huntington's disease, a progressive, hereditary movement disorder that appears in adults, but it may also occur in a variety of other conditions. Syndenham's chorea occurs in a small percentage (20 percent) of children and adolescents as a complication of rheumatic fever. Chorea can also be induced by drugs (levodopa, anti-convulsants, and anti-psychotics) metabolic and endocrine disorders, and vascular incidents.
There is no standard course of treatment for chorea. Treatment depends on the type of chorea and the associated disease. Treatment for Huntington's disease is supportive, while treatment for Syndenham's chorea usually involves antibiotic drugs to treat the infection, followed by drug therapy to prevent recurrence. Adjusting medication dosages can treat drug-induced chorea. Metabolic and endocrine-related choreas are treated according to the cause(s) of symptoms.
The prognosis for individuals with chorea varies depending on the type of chorea and the associated disease. Huntington's disease is a progressive, and ultimately, fatal disease. Syndenham's chorea is treatable and curable.
The NINDS supports research on movement disorders such as chorea. The goals of this research are to increase understanding of these disorders and to find ways to prevent and treat them.
Sydenham chorea (SD) is a neurological disorder of childhood resulting from infection via Group A beta-hemolytic streptococcus (GABHS), the bacterium that causes rheumatic fever. SD is characterized by rapid, irregular, and aimless involuntary movements of the arms and legs, trunk, and facial muscles. It affects girls more often than boys and typically occurs between 5 and 15 years of age. Some children will have a sore throat several weeks before the symptoms begin, but the disorder can also strike up to 6 months after the fever or infection has cleared. Symptoms can appear gradually or all at once, and also may include uncoordinated movements, muscular weakness, stumbling and falling, slurred speech, difficulty concentrating and writing, and emotional instability. The symptoms of SD can vary from a halting gait and slight grimacing to involuntary movements that are frequent and severe enough to be incapacitating. The random, writhing movements of chorea are caused by an auto-immune reaction to the bacterium that interferes with the normal function of a part of the brain (the basal ganglia) that controls motor movements. Due to better sanitary conditions and the use of antibiotics to treat streptococcal infections, rheumatic fever, and consequently SD, are rare in North America and Europe. The disease can still be found in developing nations.
There is no specific treatment for SD. For people with the mildest form, bed rest during the period of active movements is sufficient. When the severity of movements interferes with rest, sedative drugs, such as barbiturates or benzodiazepines, may be needed. Antiepileptic medications, such as valproic acid, are often prescribed. Doctors also recommend that children who have had SD take penicillin over the course of the next 10 years to prevent additional manifestations of rheumatic fever.
Most children recover completely from SD, although a small number will continue to have disabling, persistent chorea despite treatment. The duration of symptoms varies, generally from 3 to 6 weeks, but some children will have symptoms for several months. Cardiac complications may occur in a small minority of children, usually in the form of endocarditis. In a third of the children with the disease, SD will recur, typically 1  to 2  years after the initial attack. Researchers have noted an association between recurrent SD and the later development of the abrupt onset forms of obsessive-compulsive disorder, attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder, tic disorders, and autism, which they call PANDAS, for Pediatric Autoimmune Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated with Streptococcus infection. Further studies are needed to determine the nature of the association and the biological pathways that connect streptococcal infection, autoimmune response, and the later development of these specific behavioral disorders.
The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) and other institutes of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) conduct research related to SD in laboratories at the NIH, and support additional research through grants to major medical institutions across the country. Currently, researchers are studying how the interplay of genetic, developmental, and environmental factors could determine a childs vulnerability to SD after a GABHS infection. Other researchers are exploring whether children whose symptoms either begin or get worse following a GABHS infection share a common set of abnormal biomolecular pathways responsible for their similar clinical symptoms.