A chordoma is a rare tumor that develops from cells of the notochord, a structure that is present in the developing embryo and is important for the development of the spine. The notochord usually disappears before birth, though a few cells may remain embedded in the bones of the spine or at the base of the skull.  Chordomas can occur anywhere along the spine. Approximately half of all chordomas occur at the base of the spine; approximately one third occur at the base of the skull. Chordomas grow slowly, extending gradually into the surrounding bone and soft tissue. The actual symptoms depend on the location of the chordoma. A chordoma at the base of the skull may lead to double vision and headaches. A chordoma that occurs at the base of the spine may cause problems with bladder and bowel function. Chordomas typically occur in adults between the ages of 40 and 70. In many cases, the cause of the chordoma remains unknown. Recent studies have shown that changes in the T gene have been associated with chordoma in a small set of families. In these families an inherited duplication of the T gene is associated with an increased risk of developing chordoma. People with this inherited duplication inherit an increased risk for the condition, not the condition itself.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Chordoma. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the head - Abnormality of the vertebral column - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Chordoma - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Unfortunately, because chordomas are quite rare, the best treatment for these tumors has yet to be determined.  The current treatment for chordoma of the clivus often begins with surgery (resection) to remove as much of the tumor as possible.  The extent of surgery, or the amount of tumor that may be removed, depends on the location of the tumor and how close it is to critical structures in the brain.  Surgery is followed by radiation therapy to destroy any cancer cells that may remain after surgery.  Several studies have suggested that proton beam radiation or combined proton/photon radiation may be more effect than conventional photon radiation therapy for treating chordomas of the skull base because proton radiation may allow for a greater dose of radiation to be delivered to the tumor without damaging the surrounding normal tissues.  Approximately 60-70% of individuals treated with combined surgery and radiation therapy remained tumor-free for at least five years.
A chordoma is a rare type of cancerous tumor that can occur anywhere along the spine, from the base of the skull to the tailbone. Chordomas grow slowly, gradually extending into the bone and soft tissue around them. They often recur after treatment, and in about 40 percent of cases the cancer spreads (metastasizes) to other areas of the body, such as the lungs.  Approximately half of all chordomas occur at the base of the spine (sacrum), about one third occur in the base of the skull (occiput), and the rest occur in the cervical (neck), thoracic (upper back), or lumbar (lower back) vertebrae of the spine. As the chordoma grows, it puts pressure on the adjacent areas of the brain or spinal cord, leading to the signs and symptoms of the disorder. A chordoma anywhere along the spine may cause pain, weakness, or numbness in the back, arms, or legs. A chordoma at the base of the skull (occipital chordoma) may lead to double vision (diplopia) and headaches. A chordoma that occurs in the tailbone (coccygeal chordoma) may result in a lump large enough to be felt through the skin and may cause problems with bladder or bowel function.  Chordomas typically occur in adults between ages 40 and 70. About 5 percent of chordomas are diagnosed in children. For reasons that are unclear, males are affected about twice as often as females.
Chordomas are rare, occurring in approximately 1 per million individuals each year. Chordomas comprise fewer than 1 percent of tumors affecting the brain and spinal cord.
Changes in the T gene have been associated with chordoma. An inherited duplication of the T gene identified in a few families is associated with an increased risk of developing a chordoma. Duplications or increases in activity (expression) of the T gene have also been identified in people with chordoma who have no history of the disorder in their family. In these individuals, the changes occur only in the tumor cells and are not inherited.  The T gene provides instructions for making a protein called brachyury. Brachyury is a member of a protein family called T-box proteins, which play critical roles during embryonic development. T-box proteins regulate the activity of other genes by attaching (binding) to specific regions of DNA. On the basis of this action, T-box proteins are called transcription factors.  The brachyury protein is especially important for the early development of the spine. In human embryos, a structure called the notochord is the precursor of the spinal column. The notochord disappears before birth, but in a small percentage of individuals, some of its cells remain in the base of the skull or in the spine. In rare cases these cells begin to grow and divide uncontrollably, invading the nearby bone and soft tissue and resulting in the development of a chordoma.  Duplications and increases in expression of the T gene both result in the production of excess brachyury protein. The specific mechanism by which excess brachyury protein contributes to the development of chordomas is unclear. Some people with chordoma do not have changes in the T gene, and the cause of the disorder in these individuals is unknown.
When development of a chordoma is associated with a duplication of the T gene inherited from a parent, one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to increase the risk of the disorder, which is an inheritance pattern called autosomal dominant. People with this duplication inherit an increased risk of this condition, not the condition itself.  Other cases of chordoma are sporadic, which means they occur in people with no history of the condition in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of chordoma:  - Chordoma Foundation: Treatment  - Duke Spine Center  - Genetic Testing Registry: Chordoma  - Massachusetts General Hospital   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care