Chromosome 8q deletion is a chromosome abnormality that occurs when there is a missing copy of the genetic material located on the long arm (q) of chromosome 8. The severity of the condition and the signs and symptoms depend on the size and location of the deletion and which genes are involved. Features that often occur in people with chromosome 8q deletion include developmental delay, intellectual disability, behavioral problems, and distinctive facial features. Most cases are not inherited, but people can pass the deletion on to their children. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
Chromosome 14q deletion is a chromosome abnormality that occurs when there is a missing (deleted) copy of genetic material on the long arm (q) of chromosome 14. The severity of the condition and the signs and symptoms depend on the size and location of the deletion and which genes are involved. Features that often occur in people with chromosome 14q deletion include developmental delay, intellectual disability, behavioral problems and distinctive facial features. Chromosome testing of both parents can provide more information on whether or not the deletion was inherited. In most cases, parents do not have any chromosomal anomaly. However, sometimes one parent is found to have a balanced translocation, where a piece of a chromosome has broken off and attached to another one with no gain or loss of genetic material. The balanced translocation normally does not cause any signs or symptoms, but it increases the risk for having an affected child with a chromosomal anomaly like a deletion. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person. This page is meant to provide general information about 14q deletions. You can contact GARD if you have questions about a specific deletion on chromosome 14. To learn more about chromosomal anomalies please visit our GARD webpage on FAQs about Chromosome Disorders.
Chromosome 8p deletion is a chromosome abnormality that affects many different parts of the body. People with this condition are missing genetic material located on the short arm (p) of chromosome 8 in each cell. The severity of the condition and the associated signs and symptoms vary based on the size and location of the deletion and which genes are involved. Most cases are not inherited, although affected people can pass the deletion on to their children. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
Chromosome 12q deletion is a chromosome abnormality that occurs when there is a missing copy of the genetic material located on the long arm (q) of chromosome 12. The severity of the condition and the signs and symptoms depend on the size and location of the deletion and which genes are involved. Features that often occur in people with chromosome 12q deletion include developmental delay, intellectual disability, behavioral problems, and distinctive facial features. Most cases are not inherited, but people can pass the deletion on to their children. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
Chromosome 16p13.3 deletion syndrome is a chromosome abnormality that can affect many parts of the body. People with this condition are missing a small piece (deletion) of chromosome 16 at a location designated p13.3. Although once thought to be a severe form of Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, it is now emerging as a unique syndrome. Signs and symptoms may include failure to thrive, hypotonia (reduced muscle tone), short stature, microcephaly (unusually small head), characteristic facial features, mild to moderate intellectual disability, serious organ anomalies (i.e. heart and/or kidney problems), and vulnerability to infections. Chromosome testing of both parents can provide more information on whether or not the deletion was inherited. In most cases, parents do not have any chromosomal anomaly. However, sometimes one parent has a balanced translocation where a piece of a chromosome has broken off and attached to another one with no gain or loss of genetic material. The balanced translocation normally does not cause any signs or symptoms, but it increases the risk for having an affected child with a chromosomal anomaly like a deletion. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person. To learn more about chromosomal anomalies in general, please visit our GARD webpage on Chromosome Disorders.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Chromosome 16p13.3 deletion syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal facial shape - Abnormality of the hairline - Abnormality of the kidney - Autosomal dominant contiguous gene syndrome - Broad hallux - Broad thumb - Clinodactyly of the 5th finger - Convex nasal ridge - Death in infancy - Facial hemangioma - Facial hypertrichosis - Failure to thrive - Feeding difficulties in infancy - High palate - Hypoplastic left heart - Intellectual disability - Low hanging columella - Microcephaly - Muscular hypotonia - Myopia - Nevus sebaceous - Obesity - Polysplenia - Prominent nose - Recurrent infections - Scoliosis - Seizures - Sleep disturbance - Somatic mosaicism - Strabismus - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Chromosome 5q deletion is a chromosome abnormality that occurs when there is a missing copy of the genetic material located on the long arm (q) of chromosome 5. The severity of the condition and the signs and symptoms depend on the size and location of the deletion and which genes are involved. Features that often occur in people with chromosome 5q deletion include developmental delay, intellectual disability, behavioral problems, and distinctive facial features. Most cases are not inherited, but people can pass the deletion on to their children. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
Chromosome 4q deletion is a chromosome abnormality that affects many different parts of the body. People with this condition are missing genetic material located on the long arm (q) of chromosome 4 in each cell. The severity of the condition and the associated signs and symptoms vary based on the size and location of the deletion and which genes are involved. Common features shared by many people with this deletion include distinctive craniofacial features, skeletal abnormalities, heart defects, intellectual disability, developmental delay, and short stature. Most cases are not inherited, although affected people can pass the deletion on to their children. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
 The signs and symptoms of chromosome 4q deletion vary significantly depending on the size and location of the deletion and which genes are involved. Common features that may be shared by affected people include: Distinctive craniofacial features such as a depressed nasal bridge, cleft lip/palate, and micrognathia Skeletal abnormalities including hip dysplasia and malformations of the fingers, toes, or limbs (arms/legs) Heart defects and/or arrhythmias Hypotonia (reduced muscle tone) Seizures Short stature Developmental delay Intellectual disability Metabolic disorders Gastrointestinal problems Kidney abnormalities
 People with chromosome 4q deletion are missing genetic material located on the long arm (q) of chromosome 4 in each cell. Scientists suspect that many of the features seen in people affected by this condition are caused by the deletion and/or disruption of certain genes found on 4q. The severity of the condition and the associated signs and symptoms vary depending on the size and location of the deletion and which genes are involved. For example, deletion of the following genes may contribute to the features seen in some affected people: BMP3 - skeletal abnormalities and short stature SEC31A - distinctive craniofacial features PKD2 - kidney abnormalities GRID2, NEUROG2 - neurological problems such as seizures, hypotonia, and delayed motor development (i.e. sitting up, walking, etc) ANK2, HAND2 - heart defects and/or arrhythmias FGF2 - limb (arms and legs) abnormalities Researchers are working to learn more about the other genes on 4q that may contribute to the features seen in people with a chromosome 4q deletion.
How  Chromosome 4q deletion is usually not inherited. The deletion often occurs sporadically as a random event during the formation of the egg or sperm. In this case, a person would have no family history of the condition but could pass the deletion on to children. Rarely, this deletion is passed down from parent to child. However, the symptoms and severity can vary between family members.
 There are several different specialized tests that can be used to diagnose a chromosome 4q deletion. These include: Karyotype - a karyotype is a laboratory test that produces an image of a person's chromosomes. This test can be used to diagnose large deletions. FISH - a laboratory technique that is used to detect and locate a specific DNA sequence on a chromosome. During FISH, a chromosome is exposed to a small DNA sequence called a probe that has a fluorescent molecule attached to it. The probe sequence binds to its corresponding sequence on the chromosome. This test can be used in combination with karyotyping for deletions that are too small to be seen on karyotype, alone. However, FISH is only useful if the person ordering the test suspects there is a deletion of a specific region of 4q. Array CGH - a technology that detects deletions that are too small to be seen on karyotype.
 Because chromosome 4q deletion affects many different systems of the body, medical management is often provided by a team of doctors and other healthcare professionals. Treatment for this deletion varies based on the signs and symptoms present in each person. For example, babies with congenital heart defects and certain skeletal abnormalities may require surgery. Children with bone or muscle problems and/or delayed motor milestones (i.e. walking) may be referred for physical or occupational therapy. Certain medications may be prescribed to treat seizures. Special education services are often necessary for children with intellectual disability. Please speak to your healthcare provider if you have any questions about your personal medical management plan.
Chromosome 7p deletion is a chromosome abnormality that occurs when there is a missing copy of the genetic material located on the short arm (p) of chromosome 7. The severity of the condition and the signs and symptoms depend on the size and location of the deletion and which genes are involved. Features that often occur in people with chromosome 7p deletion include developmental delay, intellectual disability, behavioral problems, and distinctive facial features. Most cases are not inherited, but people can pass the deletion on to their children. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
Chromosome 19p deletion is a chromosome abnormality that occurs when there is a missing (deleted) copy of genetic material on the short arm (p) of chromosome 19. The severity of the condition and the signs and symptoms depend on the size and location of the deletion and which genes are involved. Features that often occur in people with chromosome 19p deletion include developmental delay, intellectual disability, behavioral problems and distinctive facial features. Chromosome testing of both parents can provide more information on whether or not the deletion was inherited. In most cases, parents do not have any chromosomal anomaly. However, sometimes one parent is found to have a balanced translocation, where a piece of a chromosome has broken off and attached to another one with no gain or loss of genetic material. The balanced translocation normally does not cause any signs or symptoms, but it increases the risk for having an affected child with a chromosomal anomaly like a deletion. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person. This page is meant to provide general information about 19p deletions. You can contact GARD if you have questions about a specific deletion on chromosome 19. To learn more about chromosomal anomalies please visit our GARD webpage on FAQs about Chromosome Disorders.