You have two kidneys, each about the size of your fist. Their main job is to filter wastes and excess water out of your blood to make urine. They also keep the body's chemical balance, help control blood pressure, and make hormones.    Chronic kidney disease (CKD) means that your kidneys are damaged and can't filter blood as they should. This damage can cause wastes to build up in your body. It can also cause other problems that can harm your health. Diabetes and high blood pressure are the most common causes of CKD.    Treatment may include medicines to lower blood pressure, control blood glucose, and lower blood cholesterol. CKD can get worse over time. CKD may lead to kidney failure. The only treatment options for kidney failure are dialysis or a kidney transplantation.    You can take steps to keep your kidneys healthier longer:       - Choose foods with less salt (sodium)    - Keep your blood pressure below 130/80    - Keep your blood glucose in the target range, if you have diabetes       NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
Anemia is a condition in which a person has a lower than normal number of red blood cells or the amount of hemoglobin in the red blood cells drops below normal, which prevents the bodys cells from getting enough oxygen. Hemoglobin is an iron-rich protein that gives blood its red color and lets red blood cells transport oxygen from the lungs to the bodys tissues. Therefore, low numbers of red blood cells or low levels of hemoglobin also cause low blood iron levels.
                
People with anemia may feel tired because their blood does not supply enough oxygen to the bodys organs and tissues. If anemia becomes severe and prolonged, the lack of oxygen in the blood can lead to shortness of breath or exercise intolerancea condition in which a person becomes easily fatigued during or after physical activityand eventually can cause the heart and other organs to fail.
While AI/ACD can affect people at any age, older adults are especially at risk because they have the highest rates of chronic disease. AI/ACD is also common among hospitalized patients, particularly those with chronic illnesses.
                
More than 130 million Americans live with at least one chronic illness.2 Addressing the causes of anemia in people with chronic disease can help improve their health and quality of life.
Anemia of inflammation and chronic disease typically develops slowly and, because it is usually mild, may cause few or no symptoms. Symptoms of anemia may also be masked by the symptoms of the underlying disease. Sometimes, AI/ACD can cause or contribute to
                
- fatigue  - weakness  - pale skin  - a fast heartbeat  - shortness of breath  - exercise intolerance
To diagnose AI/ACD, a health care provider orders a blood test called a complete blood count (CBC). A blood test involves drawing a persons blood at a health care providers office or commercial facility and sending the sample to a lab for analysis. The CBC includes a measurement of a persons hematocrit, the percentage of the blood that consists of red blood cells. The CBC also measures the amount of hemoglobin in the blood and can show whether a person has a lower than normal number of red blood cells.
                
In addition to measuring hematocrit and hemoglobin, the CBC includes two other measurements to show whether a person has enough iron:
                
- The ferritin level indicates the amount of iron stored in the body. A ferritin score below 200 nanograms per liter is a sign that a person may have an iron deficiency.  - The transferrin saturation (TSAT) is a score that indicates how much iron is available, or circulating, to make red blood cells. A TSAT score below 20 percent is another sign of iron deficiency.3
                
A CBC result that shows low iron levels in the blood yet normal measures of iron stores in the body is a hallmark of AI/ACD.
Anemia of inflammation and chronic disease often is not treated separately from the condition with which it occurs. In general, health care providers focus on treating the underlying illness. If this treatment is successful, the anemia usually resolves. For example, antibiotics prescribed for infection and anti-inflammatory medications prescribed for rheumatoid arthritis or IBD can cause AI/ACD to disappear. However, AI/ACD is increasingly being viewed as a medical condition that merits direct treatment.
                
For people with cancer or kidney disease who have low levels of EPO, a synthetic form of EPO may be prescribed. A health care provider usually injects EPO subcutaneouslyunder the skintwo or three times a week. A person may be taught how to inject the EPO at home. People on hemodialysis who cannot tolerate EPO shots may receive EPO intravenously during hemodialysis.
                
If iron deficiency has a role in causing AI/ACD, a person may need iron supplements to raise hematocrit to a target level. Iron supplements can be taken by pill, subcutaneously, or intravenously during hemodialysis.
                
People with kidney disease and AI/ACD may also be advised to take vitamin B12 and folic acid supplements. A person should talk with a health care provider before taking any supplements.
                
More information is provided in the NIDDK health topic, Anemia in Kidney Disease and Dialysis.
People with anemia caused by iron, vitamin B12, or folic acid deficiencies are usually advised to include sources of these nutrients in their diets.
                
Dietary sources of iron include
                
- beans  - breakfast cereals  - chicken  - enriched bread  - spinach  - turkey
                
Dietary sources of vitamin B12 include
                
- beef liver  - breakfast cereals  - chicken  - clams  - fish  - turkey
                
Dietary sources of folic acid include
                
- beans  - breakfast cereals  - chicken  - enriched bread  - rice  - turkey
Anemia is a condition in which the body has fewer red blood cells than normal. Red blood cells carry oxygen to tissues and organs throughout the body and enable them to use energy from food. With anemia, red blood cells carry less oxygen to tissues and organsparticularly the heart and brainand those tissues and organs may not function as well as they should.
When kidneys are diseased or damaged, they do not make enough EPO. As a result, the bone marrow makes fewer red blood cells, causing anemia. When blood has fewer red blood cells, it deprives the body of the oxygen it needs.
                
Other common causes of anemia in people with kidney disease include blood loss from hemodialysis and low levels of the following nutrients found in food:
                
- iron  - vitamin B12  - folic acid
                
These nutrients are necessary for red blood cells to make hemoglobin, the main oxygen-carrying protein in the red blood cells.
                
If treatments for kidney-related anemia do not help, the health care provider will look for other causes of anemia, including
                
- other problems with bone marrow  - inflammatory problemssuch as arthritis, lupus, or inflammatory bowel diseasein which the bodys immune system attacks the bodys own cells and organs  - chronic infections such as diabetic ulcers  - malnutrition
The signs and symptoms of anemia in someone with CKD may include
                
- weakness  - fatigue, or feeling tired  - headaches  - problems with concentration  - paleness  - dizziness  - difficulty breathing or shortness of breath  - chest pain
                
Anyone having difficulty breathing or with shortness of breath should seek immediate medical care. Anyone who has chest pain should call 911.
Heart problems are a complication of anemia and may include
                
- an irregular heartbeat or an unusually fast heartbeat, especially when exercising.  - the harmful enlargement of muscles in the heart.  - heart failure, which does not mean the heart suddenly stops working. Instead, heart failure is a long-lasting condition in which the heart cant pump enough blood to meet the bodys needs.
A health care provider diagnoses anemia based on
                
- a medical history  - a physical exam  - blood tests
                
Medical History
                
Taking a medical history is one of the first things a health care provider may do to diagnose anemia. He or she will usually ask about the patients symptoms.
                
Physical Exam
                
A physical exam may help diagnose anemia. During a physical exam, a health care provider usually examines a patients body, including checking for changes in skin color.
                
Blood Tests
                
To diagnose anemia, a health care provider may order a complete blood count, which measures the type and number of blood cells in the body. A blood test involves drawing a patients blood at a health care providers office or a commercial facility. A health care provider will carefully monitor the amount of hemoglobin in the patients blood, one of the measurements in a complete blood count.
                
The Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes Anemia Work Group recommends that health care providers diagnose anemia in males older than age 15 when their hemoglobin falls below 13 grams per deciliter (g/dL) and in females older than 15 when it falls below 12 g/dL.2 If someone has lost at least half of normal kidney function and has low hemoglobin, the cause of anemia may be decreased EPO production.
                
Two other blood tests help measure iron levels:
                
- The ferritin level helps assess the amount of iron stored in the body. A ferritin score below 200 nanograms (ng) per liter may mean a person has iron deficiency that requires treatment.2  - The transferrin saturation score indicates how much iron is available to make red blood cells. A transferrin saturation score below 30 percent can also mean low iron levels that require treatment.2
                
In addition to blood tests, the health care provider may order other tests, such as tests for blood loss in stool, to look for other causes of anemia.
A health care provider may advise people with kidney disease who have anemia caused by iron, vitamin B12, or folic acid deficiencies to include sources of these nutrients in their diets. Some of these foods are high in sodium or phosphorus, which people with CKD should limit in their diet. Before making any dietary changes, people with CKD should talk with their health care provider or with a dietitian who specializes in helping people with kidney disease. A dietitian can help a person plan healthy meals.
                
Read more about nutrition for people with CKD on the National Kidney Disease Education Program website.
                
The following chart illustrates some good dietary sources of iron, vitamin B12, and folic acid.
                
Food    Serving Size    Iron    Vitamin B12    Folic Acid          Recommended Daily Value        18 mg    6 mcg    400 mcg        100 percent fortified breakfast cereal     cup (1 oz)    18 mg    6 mcg    394 mcg        beans, baked    1 cup (8 oz)    8 mg    0 mcg    37 mcg        beef, ground    3 oz    2 mg    2 mcg    8 mcg        beef liver    3 oz    5 mg    67 mcg    211 mcg        clams, fried    4 oz    3 mg    1 mcg    66 mcg        spinach, boiled    1 cup (3 oz)    2 mg    0 mcg    115 mcg        spinach, fresh    1 cup (1 oz)    1 mg    0 mcg    58 mcg        trout    3 oz    0 mg    5 mcg    16 mcg        tuna, canned    3 oz    1 mg    1 mcg    2 mcg