Ring chromosome 20 is a chromosome abnormality that affects the development and function of the brain. People with ring chromosome 20 often have recurrent seizures or epilepsy. Other symptoms might include intellectual disability, behavioral difficulties, growth delay, short stature, a small head (microcephaly), and characteristic facial features. Ring chromosome 20 is caused by an abnormal chromosome known as a ring chromosome 20 or r(20). A ring chromosome is a circular structure that occurs when a chromosome breaks in two places and its broken ends fuse together. Ring chromosome 20 is usually not inherited. It almost always occurs by chance during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) or in early embryonic development. Treatment for ring chromosome 20 is focused on management of seizures and accommodations for learning.
 Treatment of ring chromosome 20 is typically focused on management of seizures. The seizures associated with ring chromosome 20 do not generally respond well to medications. The treatment that is successful varies from person to person. Broad spectrum AEDs are usually tried first since they are active against different seizure types. This includes valproate, levetiracetam, lamotrigine, topiramate and zonisamide. Success has been reported in some people with a combination of valproate and lamotrigine, but so far no single therapy has worked for everyone.  Vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) has been tried and a reduction in seizures has been reported in some cases but not in others. This involves implanting a medical device under the skin, similar to a pacemaker that delivers a mild electrical current to the brain via the vagus nerve. The long-term effectiveness of VNS therapy is not yet known.  The ketogenic diet, which is high in fat and low in carbohydrate, has been shown to be helpful in other types of epilepsy. However there are no published reports about whether this is successful or not in ring chromosome 20 epilepsy. For more information on treatment of seizures in people with R20 and general information on ring chromosome 20, visit the following link from Unique, The Rare Chromosome Disorder Support Group, a non-profit organization that supports chromosomal disorders.  http://www.rarechromo.org/information/Chromosome%2020/Ring%2020%20FTNW.pdf
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Ring chromosome 8. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the palate 90% Abnormality of the ureter 90% Anteverted nares 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Deviation of finger 90% Epicanthus 90% Frontal bossing 90% High forehead 90% Low posterior hairline 90% Polyhydramnios 90% Round ear 90% Short nose 90% Sloping forehead 90% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Ring chromosome 10. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the antihelix 90% Abnormality of the nipple 90% Abnormality of the nose 90% Aganglionic megacolon 90% Aplasia/Hypoplasia affecting the eye 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Decreased body weight 90% Frontal bossing 90% Hypertelorism 90% Hypocalcemia 90% Intrauterine growth retardation 90% Large earlobe 90% Long philtrum 90% Low-set, posteriorly rotated ears 90% Muscular hypotonia 90% Pectus excavatum 90% Renal hypoplasia/aplasia 90% Sandal gap 90% Seizures 90% Short neck 90% Tapered finger 90% Thin vermilion border 90% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Ring chromosome 14 syndrome is a condition characterized by seizures and intellectual disability. Recurrent seizures (epilepsy) develop in infancy or early childhood. In many cases, the seizures are resistant to treatment with anti-epileptic drugs. Most people with ring chromosome 14 syndrome also have some degree of intellectual disability or learning problems. Development may be delayed, particularly the development of speech and of motor skills such as sitting, standing, and walking.  Additional features of ring chromosome 14 syndrome can include slow growth and short stature, a small head (microcephaly), puffy hands and/or feet caused by a buildup of fluid (lymphedema), and subtle differences in facial features. Some affected individuals have problems with their immune system that lead to recurrent infections, especially involving the respiratory system. Abnormalities of the retina, the specialized tissue at the back of the eye that detects light and color, have also been reported in some people with this condition. These changes typically do not affect vision. Major birth defects are rarely seen with ring chromosome 14 syndrome.
Ring chromosome 14 syndrome appears to be a rare condition, although its prevalence is unknown. More than 50 affected individuals have been reported in the medical literature.
Ring chromosome 14 syndrome is caused by a chromosomal abnormality known as a ring chromosome 14, sometimes written as r(14). A ring chromosome is a circular structure that occurs when a chromosome breaks in two places and its broken ends fuse together. People with ring chromosome 14 syndrome have one copy of this abnormal chromosome in some or all of their cells.  Researchers believe that several critical genes near the end of the long (q) arm of chromosome 14 are lost when the ring chromosome forms. The loss of these genes is likely responsible for several of the major features of ring chromosome 14 syndrome, including intellectual disability and delayed development. Researchers are still working to determine which missing genes contribute to the signs and symptoms of this disorder.  Epilepsy is a common feature of ring chromosome syndromes, including ring chromosome 14. There may be something about the ring structure itself that causes epilepsy. Seizures may occur because certain genes on the ring chromosome 14 are less active than those on the normal chromosome 14. Alternately, seizures might result from instability of the ring chromosome in some cells.
Ring chromosome 14 syndrome is almost never inherited. A ring chromosome typically occurs as a random event during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) or in early embryonic development. In some cases, the ring chromosome is present in only some of a person's cells. This situation is known as mosaicism.  Most affected individuals have no history of the disorder in their families. However, at least two families have been reported in which a ring chromosome 14 was passed from a mother to her children.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of ring chromosome 14 syndrome:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Ring chromosome 14  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Chromosome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Ring chromosome 20 syndrome is a condition that affects the normal development and function of the brain. The most common feature of this condition is recurrent seizures (epilepsy) in childhood. The seizures may occur during the day or at night during sleep. They are described as partial seizures because they affect only one area of the brain, a region called the frontal lobe. In many cases, the seizures are complex and resistant to treatment with anti-epileptic drugs. Prolonged seizure episodes known as non-convulsive status epilepticus also appear to be characteristic of ring chromosome 20 syndrome. These episodes involve confusion and behavioral changes.  Most people with ring chromosome 20 syndrome also have some degree of intellectual disability and behavioral difficulties. Although these problems can appear either before or after the onset of epilepsy, they tend to worsen after seizures develop. Additional features of this condition can include slow growth and short stature, a small head (microcephaly), and subtle differences in facial features. Major birth defects are rarely seen with ring chromosome 20 syndrome.
Ring chromosome 20 syndrome appears to be a rare condition, although its prevalence is unknown. More than 60 affected individuals have been reported in the medical literature.
Ring chromosome 20 syndrome is caused by a chromosomal abnormality known as a ring chromosome 20 or r(20). A ring chromosome is a circular structure that occurs when a chromosome breaks in two places and its broken ends fuse together. People with ring chromosome 20 syndrome have one copy of this abnormal chromosome in some or all of their cells.  It is not well understood how the ring chromosome causes the signs and symptoms of this syndrome. In some affected individuals, genes near the ends of chromosome 20 are deleted when the ring chromosome forms. Researchers suspect that the loss of these genes may be responsible for epilepsy and other health problems. However, other affected individuals do not have gene deletions associated with the ring chromosome. In these people, the ring chromosome may change the activity of certain genes on chromosome 20, or it may be unable to copy (replicate) itself normally during cell division. Researchers are still working to determine the precise relationship between the ring chromosome 20 and the characteristic features of the syndrome.
Ring chromosome 20 syndrome is almost never inherited. A ring chromosome typically occurs as a random event during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) or in early embryonic development. Often, the ring chromosome is present in only some of a person's cells. This situation is known as mosaicism.  Most affected individuals have no history of the disorder in their families. However, at least one family has been reported in which a ring chromosome 20 was passed from a mother to her children.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of ring chromosome 20 syndrome:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Ring chromosome 20 syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Chromosome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Epilepsy   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care