Coffin-Siris syndrome is a genetic condition that causes variable degrees of learning disability, developmental delays, underdeveloped pinky toenails or fingernails, and distinct facial features. It can be caused by a change (mutation) in any of several genes including the ARID1A, ARID1B, SMARCA4, SMARCB1, or SMARCE1 genes. Coffin-Siris syndrome follows an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, however it usually occurs for the first time in a family due to a new mutation. Occupational, physical, and/or speech therapy can help affected individuals reach their full potential.
 Coffin-Siris syndrome is caused by a change (mutation) in either the ARID1A, ARID1B, SMARCA4, SMARCB1, or SMARCE1 gene. Exactly how these gene mutations result in the symptoms of Coffin-Siris syndrome is not known, however it is thought that the mutations affect how genetic material is packaged in the cell. Coffin-Siris syndrome is an autosomal dominant condition; as only one gene mutation is needed to cause the syndrome. It usually occurs for the first time in a family due to a new mutation.  In some cases, no genetic mutation can be identified and the cause of Coffin-Siris syndrome in the family remains unknown.
 Diagnosis of Coffin-Siris syndrome is largely based upon the presence or absence of common signs and symptoms in the individual. While formal diagnostic criteria have not been established, most individuals with a clinical diagnosis of Coffin-Siris syndrome have certain features in common. You can find detailed information on this topic at the following link to GeneReviews. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK131811/#coffin-siris.Diagnosis Genetic testing may also be used to diagnose or confirm cases of Coffin-Siris syndrome.
 People with Coffin-Siris syndrome may benefit from occupational, physical, and speech therapy. Developmental pediatricians may be helpful in recommending and coordinating therapeutic and educational interventions. Additional specialty care may be needed depending on the symptoms in the individual, such as by gastrointestinal, eye, kidney, heart, and hearing specialists.
Coffin-Siris syndrome is a rare condition that is diagnosed in females more frequently than in males. Approximately 140 cases have been reported in the medical literature.
Coffin-Siris syndrome is caused by mutations in the ARID1A, ARID1B, SMARCA4, SMARCB1, or SMARCE1 gene. Each of these genes provides instructions for making one piece (subunit) of several different SWI/SNF protein complexes. SWI/SNF complexes regulate gene activity (expression) by a process known as chromatin remodeling. Chromatin is the network of DNA and protein that packages DNA into chromosomes. The structure of chromatin can be changed (remodeled) to alter how tightly regions of DNA are packaged. Chromatin remodeling is one way gene expression is regulated during development; when DNA is tightly packed, gene expression is often lower than when DNA is loosely packed.  Through their ability to regulate gene activity, SWI/SNF complexes are involved in many processes, including repairing damaged DNA; copying (replicating) DNA; and controlling the growth, division, and maturation (differentiation) of cells.  Although it is unclear what effect mutations in these genes have on SWI/SNF complexes, researchers suggest that the mutations result in abnormal chromatin remodeling. Disturbance of this process alters the activity of many genes and disrupts several cellular processes, which could explain the diverse signs and symptoms of Coffin-Siris syndrome.
Coffin-Siris syndrome appears to follow an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. However, the condition is not usually inherited from an affected parent, but occurs from new (de novo) mutations in the gene that likely occur during early embryonic development.