Cohen syndrome is a congenital (present since birth) condition that was first described in 1973 by Dr. M.M. Cohen, Jr. When the syndrome was first described, it was believed that its main features were obesity, hypotonia (low muscle tone), intellectual disabilities, distinctive facial features with prominent upper central teeth and abnormalities of the hands and feet. Since Cohen syndrome was first described, over 100 cases have been reported worldwide. It is now known that the signs and symptoms present in people with Cohen syndrome may vary considerably. Although the exact cause of Cohen syndrome is unknown, some people with the condition have been found to have mutations in a gene called COH1 (also referred to as VPS13B). When Cohen syndrome is found to be inherited in families, it follows an autosomal recessive pattern. No cure is currently available; however, treatment for Cohen syndrome is focused on improving or alleviating signs and symptoms as they arise.
 The diagnosis of Cohen syndrome is based on the symptoms present in the patient, but because the symptoms vary greatly from person to person, no consensus diagnostic criteria exist. Genetic testing is available for COH1, the only gene known to be associated with Cohen syndrome. However, the rate at which mutations are detected via genetic testing varies by ethnicity. For example, the mutation detection rate in COH1 is higher among the Finnish and Old Amish compared to individuals of from other populations.
 There is no cure for Cohen syndrome. Treatment is focused on improving or alleviating the signs and symptoms in the patient. Typically, when a person is first diagnosed with Cohen syndrome, he or she will undergo an eye and blood examination. If vision problems are detected, early correction of the problems, usually with glasses, often leads to general improvement of cognitive skills. If neutropenia (a condition in which an abnormally low number of white blood cells called neutrophils are present, which may result in an increased risk for infections)  is discovered when the blood is examined, treatment should be given. Follow-up should include annual eye exams and repeat testing of white blood cell count. Early intervention and physical, occupational, and speech therapy can address developmental delay, hypotonia, joint hyperextensibility, and motor clumsiness.
The exact incidence of Cohen syndrome is unknown. It has been diagnosed in fewer than 1,000 people worldwide. More cases are likely undiagnosed.
Mutations in the VPS13B gene (frequently called the COH1 gene) cause Cohen syndrome. The function of the protein produced from the VPS13B gene is unknown; however, researchers suggest it may be involved in sorting and transporting proteins inside the cell. Most mutations in the VPS13B gene are believed to prevent cells from producing a functional VPS13B protein. It is unclear how loss of functional VPS13B protein leads to the signs and symptoms of Cohen syndrome.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.