Collagenous colitis is a type of inflammatory bowel disease that affects the colon. It is a form of microscopic colitis, which means that the inflammation is only visible when a biopsy is examined under a microscope; the inflammation cannot be seen or diagnosed from colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy. Signs and symptoms may be ongoing or intermittent and may include chronic, watery, non-bloody diarrhea and abdominal pain or cramps. The exact underlying cause is unknown but may relate to a bacteria, a virus, an autoimmune response, and/or a genetic predisposition. Treatment for collagenous colitis varies depending on the symptoms and severity in each individual. In some cases, the condition resolves on its own.
 All individuals with collagenous colitis experience chronic, watery, non-bloody diarrhea which is what typically prompts individuals to seek medical attention. Onset of diarrhea may occur gradually over time or may be sudden and abrupt. Episodes of diarrhea may be intermittent and can occur over weeks, months or years. Other signs and symptoms that commonly occur in affected individuals include abdominal pain or cramping; flatulence; bloating; and weight loss. Incontinence, urgency, nausea, vomiting and fatigue have also been reported. Some individuals with collagenous colitis experience spontaneous remission even without treatment; however, relapses can occur.
 Treatment for collagenous colitis varies depending on the symptoms and severity in each affected individual. In some cases the condition may resolve on its own (spontaneous remission), although most people continue to have ongoing or occasional diarrhea. Dietary changes are usually tried first to alleviate symptoms. These changes may include a reduced-fat diet, eliminating foods that contain caffeine and lactose, and avoiding over-the-counter pain relievers such as ibuprofen or aspirin. If these changes alone are not enough, medications can be used to help control symptoms. However, the response rate to various types of medication reportedly varies. Prescription anti-inflammatory medications such as mesalamine and sulfasalazine may help reduce swelling. Steroids including budesonide and prednisone can be used reduce inflammation, but they are usually only used to control sudden attacks of diarrhea. Long-term use of steroids is typically avoided because of unwanted side effects. Anti-diarrheal medications such as bismuth subsalicylate, diphenoxylate with atropine, and loperamide can offer short-term relief. Immunosuppressive agents such as azathioprine help to reduce inflammation but are rarely needed. In extreme cases where the condition does not respond to medications, surgery to remove all or part of the colon may be necessary. However, surgery is rarely recommended.
Lymphocytic colitis is form of microscopic colitis, a condition that is characterized by inflammation of the colon (large intestines). As the name suggests, microscopic colitis can only be diagnosed by examining a small sample of colon tissue under a microscope. In lymphocytic colitis, specifically, the tissues and lining of the colon are of normal thickness, but an increase in the number of lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell) is observed. Signs and symptoms of the condition may include chronic, watery diarrhea; abdominal pain, cramping, and bloating; weight loss; nausea; dehydration; and/or fecal incontinence. The underlying cause of lymphocytic colitis is currently unknown; however, scientists suspect that autoimmune conditions, medications, infections, genetic factors, and/or bile acid malabsorption may contribute to the development of the condition. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person and may include certain medications, dietary modifications, and in rare cases, surgery.
Microscopic colitis is an inflammation of the colon that a health care provider can see only with a microscope. Inflammation is the bodys normal response to injury, irritation, or infection of tissues. Microscopic colitis is a type of inflammatory bowel diseasethe general name for diseases that cause irritation and inflammation in the intestines.
                
The two types of microscopic colitis are collagenous colitis and lymphocytic colitis. Health care providers often use the term microscopic colitis to describe both types because their symptoms and treatments are the same. Some scientists believe that collagenous colitis and lymphocytic colitis may be different phases of the same condition rather than separate conditions.
                
In both types of microscopic colitis, an increase in the number of lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell, can be seen in the epitheliumthe layer of cells that lines the colon. An increase in the number of white blood cells is a sign of inflammation. The two types of colitis affect the colon tissue in slightly different ways:
                
- Lymphocytic colitis. The number of lymphocytes is higher, and the tissues and lining of the colon are of normal thickness.  - Collagenous colitis. The layer of collagen, a threadlike protein, underneath the epithelium builds up and becomes thicker than normal.
                
When looking through a microscope, the health care provider may find variations in lymphocyte numbers and collagen thickness in different parts of the colon. These variations may indicate an overlap of the two types of microscopic colitis.
The most common symptom of microscopic colitis is chronic, watery, nonbloody diarrhea. Episodes of diarrhea can last for weeks, months, or even years. However, many people with microscopic colitis may have long periods without diarrhea. Other signs and symptoms of microscopic colitis can include
                
- a strong urgency to have a bowel movement or a need to go to the bathroom quickly  - pain, cramping, or bloating in the abdomenthe area between the chest and the hipsthat is usually mild  - weight loss  - fecal incontinenceaccidental passing of stool or fluid from the rectumespecially at night  - nausea  - dehydrationa condition that results from not taking in enough liquids to replace fluids lost through diarrhea
                
The symptoms of microscopic colitis can come and go frequently. Sometimes, the symptoms go away without treatment.
Treatment depends on the severity of symptoms. The gastroenterologist will
                
- review the medications the person is taking  - make recommendations to change or stop certain medications  - recommend that the person quit smoking
                
The gastroenterologist may prescribe medications to help control symptoms. Medications are almost always effective in treating microscopic colitis. The gastroenterologist may recommend eating, diet, and nutrition changes. In rare cases, the gastroenterologist may recommend surgery.
                
Medications
                
The gastroenterologist may prescribe one or more of the following:
                
- antidiarrheal medications such as bismuth subsalicylate (Kaopectate, Pepto-Bismol), diphenoxylate/atropine (Lomotil), and loperamide  - corticosteroids such as budesonide (Entocort) and prednisone  - anti-inflammatory medications such as mesalamine and sulfasalazine (Azulfidine)  - cholestyramine resin (Locholest, Questran)a medication that blocks bile acids  - antibiotics such as metronidazole (Flagyl) and erythromycin  - immunomodulators such as mercaptopurine (Purinethol), azathioprine (Azasan, Imuran), and methotrexate (Rheumatrex, Trexall)  - anti-TNF therapies such as infliximab (Remicade) and adalimumab (Humira)
                
Corticosteroids are medications that decrease inflammation and reduce the activity of the immune system. These medications can have many side effects. Scientists have shown that budesonide is safer, with fewer side effects, than prednisone. Most health care providers consider budesonide the best medication for treating microscopic colitis.
                
Patients with microscopic colitis generally achieve relief through treatment with medications, although relapses can occur. Some patients may need long-term treatment if they continue to have relapses.
To help reduce symptoms, a health care provider may recommend the following dietary changes:
                
- avoid foods and drinks that contain caffeine or artificial sugars  - drink plenty of liquids to prevent dehydration during episodes of diarrhea  - eat a milk-free diet if the person is also lactose intolerant  - eat a gluten-free diet
                
People should talk with their health care provider or dietitian about what type of diet is right for them.
                
Surgery
                
When the symptoms of microscopic colitis are severe and medications arent effective, a gastroenterologist may recommend surgery to remove the colon. Surgery is a rare treatment for microscopic colitis. The gastroenterologist will exclude other causes of symptoms before considering surgery.
Researchers do not know how to prevent microscopic colitis. However, researchers do believe that people who follow the recommendations of their health care provider may be able to prevent relapses of microscopic colitis.
No. Unlike the other inflammatory bowel diseases, such as Crohns disease and ulcerative colitis, microscopic colitis does not increase a persons risk of getting colon cancer.