Collagen VI-related myopathy is rare. Bethlem myopathy is estimated to occur in 0.77 per 100,000 individuals, and Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy is estimated to occur in 0.13 per 100,000 individuals. Only a few cases of the intermediate form have been described in the scientific literature.
Mutations in the COL6A1, COL6A2, and COL6A3 genes can cause the various forms of collagen VI-related myopathy. These genes each provide instructions for making one component of a protein called type VI collagen. Type VI collagen makes up part of the extracellular matrix that surrounds muscle cells and connective tissue. This matrix is an intricate lattice that forms in the space between cells and provides structural support. The extracellular matrix is necessary for cell stability and growth. Research suggests that type VI collagen helps secure and organize the extracellular matrix by linking the matrix to the cells it surrounds.  Mutations in the COL6A1, COL6A2, and COL6A3 genes result in a decrease or lack of type VI collagen or the production of abnormal type VI collagen. While it is difficult to predict which type of mutation will lead to which form of collagen VI-related myopathy, in general, lower amounts of type VI collagen lead to more severe signs and symptoms that begin earlier in life.  Changes in type VI collagen structure or production lead to an unstable extracellular matrix that is no longer attached to cells. As a result, the stability of the surrounding muscle cells and connective tissue progressively declines, which leads to the muscle weakness, contractures, and other signs and symptoms of collagen VI-related myopathy.
Collagen VI-related myopathy can be inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Bethlem myopathy is typically inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, as are some cases of the intermediate form and a few rare instances of Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy. Most cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. In other cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent.  Collagen VI-related myopathy can be inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy is typically inherited in an autosomal recessive manner, as are some cases of the intermediate form and a few rare instances of Bethlem myopathy. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of collagen VI-related myopathy:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Collagen Type VI-Related Disorders  - Genetic Testing Registry: Bethlem myopathy  - Genetic Testing Registry: Collagen Type VI-Related Autosomal Dominant Limb-girdle Muscular Dystrophy  - Genetic Testing Registry: Collagen VI-related myopathy  - Genetic Testing Registry: Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy  - Muscular Dystrophy UK: Could Cyclosporine A be used to treat Bethlem myopathy and Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy?   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care