How Tumors Form The body is made up of many types of cells. Normally, cells grow, divide, and produce more cells as needed to keep the body healthy and functioning properly. Sometimes, however, the process goes wrong -- cells become abnormal and form more cells in an uncontrolled way. These extra cells form a mass of tissue, called a growth or tumor. Tumors can be benign, which means not cancerous, or malignant, which means cancerous. How Colorectal Cancer Develops Cancer of the colon or rectum is called colorectal cancer. The colon and the rectum are part of the large intestine, which is part of the digestive system. Colorectal cancer occurs when tumors form in the lining of the large intestine, also called the large bowel. Colorectal cancer accounts for almost ten percent of all cancer deaths in the United States. The risk of developing colorectal cancer rises after age 50. It is common in both men and women. Colorectal Cancer Can Spread Sometimes, cancer cells break away from the malignant tumor and enter the bloodstream or the lymphatic system where they travel to other organs in the body. Among other things, the lymphatic system transports white blood cells that fight infection. When cancer travels or spreads from its original location in the colon to another part of the body such as the liver, it is called metastatic colorectal cancer and not liver cancer. When colorectal cancer does spread, it tends to spread to the liver or lungs. Cure Rate for Early Detection Today there are more ways than ever to treat colorectal cancer. As with almost all cancers, the earlier it is found, the more likely that the treatment will be successful. If colon cancer is detected in its early stages, it is up to 90 percent curable.
There are several treatment options for colorectal cancer, although most treatments begin with surgical removal of either the cancerous polyp or section of the colon. The choice of treatment depends on your age and general health, the stage of cancer, whether or not it has spread beyond the colon, and other factors. If tests show that you have cancer, you should talk with your doctor and make treatment decisions as soon as possible. Studies show that early treatment leads to better outcomes. Working With a Team of Specialists A team of specialists often treats people with cancer. The team will keep the primary doctor informed about the patient's progress. The team may include a medical oncologist who is a specialist in cancer treatment, a surgeon, a radiation oncologist who is a specialist in radiation therapy, and others. Before starting treatment, you may want another doctor to review the diagnosis and treatment plan. Some insurance companies require a second opinion. Others may pay for a second opinion if you request it. Clinical Trials for Colorectal Cancer Some colorectal cancer patients take part in studies of new treatments. These studies, called clinical trials, are designed to find out whether a new treatment is safe and effective. Often, clinical trials compare a new treatment with a standard one so that doctors can learn which is more effective. People with colorectal cancer who are interested in taking part in a clinical trial should talk with their doctor. The U.S. National Institutes of Health, through its National Library of Medicine and other Institutes, maintains a database of clinical trials at ClinicalTrials.gov. Click here to see a list of the current clinical trials on colorectal cancer. A separate window will open. Click the "x" in the upper right hand corner of the "Clinical Trials" window to return here.
Colorectal cancer accounts for almost ten percent of all cancer deaths in the United States. The risk of developing colorectal cancer rises after age 50. It is common in both men and women.
Studies show that the following risk factors may increase a person's chances of developing colorectal cancer: age, polyps, personal history, family history, and ulcerative colitis.
Possible signs of colorectal cancer include: - a change in the frequency of bowel movements   - diarrhea, constipation, or feeling that the bowel does not empty completely   - either bright red or very dark blood in the stool a change in the frequency of bowel movements diarrhea, constipation, or feeling that the bowel does not empty completely either bright red or very dark blood in the stool - stools that are narrower than usual  - general abdominal discomfort such as frequent gas pains, bloating, fullness, and/or cramps   - weight loss with no known reason  - constant tiredness  - vomiting stools that are narrower than usual general abdominal discomfort such as frequent gas pains, bloating, fullness, and/or cramps weight loss with no known reason constant tiredness vomiting
Scientists have done research on chemoprevention -- the use of drugs to prevent cancer from developing in the first place. Most of these studies have looked at people with high risk for the disease (where it runs in families) and not in the general population. For example, researchers have found that anti-inflammatory drugs helped keep intestinal tumors from forming, but serious side effects have been noted so researchers are proceeding cautiously. Studies have shown that non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs can keep large bowel polyps from forming. Bowel polyps can start out benign, or non-cancerous, but can become cancerous. Serious cardiac effects of these drugs have been noted so researchers are also proceeding cautiously in recommending these drugs for prevention.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Familial colorectal cancer. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal carcinoma - Neoplasm of the stomach - Renal cell carcinoma - Transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder - Uterine leiomyosarcoma - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.