Nonbullous congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma (NBCIE) is a specific type of ichthyosis mainly affecting the skin. Most infants with NBCIE are born with a tight, shiny covering on their skin, called a collodion membrane, which is typically shed within a few weeks. Other signs and symptoms include redness of the skin (erythroderma); fine, white scales on the skin; and thickening of the skin on the palms and soles of feet (palmoplantar keratoderma). Some people with NBCIE also have outward turning eyelids (ectropion); outward turning lips (eclabium); and nails that do not grow normally (nail dystrophy). NBCIE may be caused by mutations in any one of at least three genes: ALOX12B, ALOXE3 or NIPAL4. In some people with NBCIE, the cause of the disorder is unknown.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Nonbullous congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Hypohidrosis 90% Ectropion 5% Short finger 5% Short toe 5% Small nail 5% Thin nail 5% Abnormality of the hair - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma - Congenital nonbullous ichthyosiform erythroderma - External genital hypoplasia - Growth delay - Intellectual disability - Palmoplantar keratoderma - Paralysis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 There is currently no cure for nonbullous congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma (NBCIE). Treatment generally focuses on managing the specific signs and symptoms each individual has. For newborns, the most important goals are to provide a moist environment in an isolette, and to prevent and treat infections. Petrolatum-based creams and ointments are typically used to keep the skin soft and hydrated. As children age, keratolytic agents (agents that help the skin loosen and shed) such as alpha-hydroxy acid or urea preparations can be used to promote the peeling and thinning of the outer layer of the skin. For individuals with severe skin involvement, oral retinoid therapy may be recommended. However, because this is known to cause abnormalities in a developing fetus, it should be used with caution in women of child-bearing age. In general, any agents that irritate the skin should be avoided. Ectropion (turning out of the eyelid) can cause dryness of the cornea (especially at night), so artificial tears or prescription ointments may be used to keep the cornea moist. ClinicalTrials.gov provides access to information on clinical studies (including therapies) for different types of ichthyosis. To view a list of the studies currently listed, click here.
Congenital hemidysplasia with ichthyosiform erythroderma and limb defects, more commonly known by the acronym CHILD syndrome, is a condition that affects the development of several parts of the body. The signs and symptoms of this disorder are typically limited to either the right side or the left side of the body. ("Hemi-" means "half," and "dysplasia" refers to abnormal growth.) The right side is affected about twice as often as the left side.  People with CHILD syndrome have a skin condition characterized by large patches of skin that are red and inflamed (erythroderma) and covered with flaky scales (ichthyosis). This condition is most likely to occur in skin folds and creases and usually does not affect the face. The skin abnormalities are present at birth and persist throughout life.  CHILD syndrome also disrupts the formation of the arms and legs during early development. Children with this disorder may be born with one or more limbs that are shortened or missing. The limb abnormalities occur on the same side of the body as the skin abnormalities.  Additionally, CHILD syndrome may affect the development of the brain, heart, lungs, and kidneys.
CHILD syndrome is a rare disorder; it has been reported in about 60 people worldwide. This condition occurs almost exclusively in females.
Mutations in the NSDHL gene cause CHILD syndrome. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme that is involved in the production of cholesterol. Cholesterol is a type of fat that is produced in the body and obtained from foods that come from animals, particularly egg yolks, meat, fish, and dairy products. Although high cholesterol levels are a well-known risk factor for heart disease, the body needs some cholesterol to develop and function normally both before and after birth. Cholesterol is an important component of cell membranes and the protective substance covering nerve cells (myelin). Additionally, cholesterol plays a role in the production of certain hormones and digestive acids.  The mutations that underlie CHILD syndrome eliminate the activity of the NSDHL enzyme, which disrupts the normal production of cholesterol within cells. A shortage of this enzyme may also allow potentially toxic byproducts of cholesterol production to build up in the body's tissues. Researchers suspect that low cholesterol levels and/or an accumulation of other substances disrupt the growth and development of many parts of the body. It is not known, however, how a disturbance in cholesterol production leads to the specific features of CHILD syndrome.
This condition has an X-linked dominant pattern of inheritance. A condition is considered X-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes. The inheritance is dominant if one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition.  Most cases of CHILD syndrome occur sporadically, which means only one member of a family is affected. Rarely, the condition can run in families and is passed from mother to daughter. Researchers believe that CHILD syndrome occurs almost exclusively in females because affected males die before birth. Only one male with CHILD syndrome has been reported.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of CHILD syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: NSDHL-Related Disorders  - Genetic Testing Registry: Child syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Nonbullous congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma (NBCIE) is a condition that mainly affects the skin. Some affected infants are born with a tight, clear sheath covering their skin called a collodion membrane. This membrane is usually shed during the first few weeks of life. Individuals with NBCIE have skin that is red (erythema) and covered with fine white scales. Some people with NBCIE have outward turning eyelids and lips, a thickening of the skin on the palms and soles of the feet (keratoderma), and nails that do not grow normally (nail dystrophy). Infants with NBCIE may develop infections, an excessive loss of fluids (dehydration), and respiratory problems early in life.
NBCIE is estimated to affect 1 in 200,000 to 300,000 individuals in the United States. This condition is more common in Norway, where an estimated 1 in 90,000 people are affected.
Mutations in at least three genes can cause NBCIE. These genes provide instructions for making proteins that are found in the outermost layer of the skin (the epidermis). The epidermis forms a protective barrier between the body and its surrounding environment. The skin abnormalities associated with NBCIE disrupt this protective barrier, making it more difficult for affected infants to control water loss, regulate body temperature, and fight infections.  Mutations in the ALOX12B and ALOXE3 genes are responsible for the majority of cases of NBCIE. Mutations in one other gene associated with this condition are found in only a small percentage of cases. In some people with NBCIE, the cause of the disorder is unknown. Researchers are looking for additional genes that are associated with NBCIE.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of nonbullous congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma:  - Foundation for Ichthyosis and Related Skin Types (FIRST): Treatments  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Autosomal Recessive Congenital Ichthyosis  - Genetic Testing Registry: Autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis 2   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care