The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Adrenogenital syndrome - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Congenital adrenal hyperplasia - Hypospadias - Renal salt wasting - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) refers to a group of genetic conditions that affect the adrenal glands. These glands sit on top of the kidneys and are responsible for releasing various types of hormones that the body needs to function. Affected people lack an enzyme the adrenal glands need to make one or more of these hormones and often overproduce androgens (male hormones such as testosterone). The signs and symptoms present in each person depend on many factors including the type of CAH, the age of diagnosis, and the sex of the affected person. For example, females with a severe form of the condition may have ambiguous genitalia at birth and if not properly diagnosed, develop dehydration, poor feeding, diarrhea, vomiting and other health problems soon after. People with milder forms may not be diagnosed with the condition until adolescence or adulthood when they experience early signs of puberty or fertility problems. Treatment for CAH varies but may include medication and/or surgery.
 Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a group of genetic conditions that can be caused by a change (mutation) in several different genes: 21-hydroxylase deficiency is caused by mutations in the CYP21A2 gene 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency is caused by mutations in the HSD3B2 gene 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency is caused by mutations in the CYP11B1 gene Cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase deficiency is caused by mutations in the POR gene 17-hydroxylase deficiency is caused by mutations in the CYP17A1 gene Congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia is caused by mutations in the STAR gene Most of these genes encode enzymes that the adrenal glands need to make one or more hormones. The adrenal glands are cone-shaped organs that sit on top of the kidneys and are responsible for releasing various types of hormones that the body needs to function. Mutations in these genes lead to deficient levels of enzymes which cause low levels of hormones such as cortisol and/or aldosterone and an overproduction of androgens (male hormones such as testosterone). Cortisol is a hormone that affects energy levels, blood sugar levels, blood pressure, and the body's response to stress, illness, and injury. Aldosterone helps the body maintain the proper level of sodium (salt) and water and helps maintain blood pressure. Irregular levels of these hormones lead to the signs and symptoms of CAH.
How  All forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that to be affected, a person must have a mutation in both copies of the responsible gene in each cell. The parents of an affected person usually each carry one mutated copy of the gene and are referred to as carriers. Carriers typically do not show signs or symptoms of the condition. When two carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be a carrier like each of the parents, and a 25% chance to not have the condition and not be a carrier.
 Yes, genetic testing is available for many of the genes known to cause congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH). Carrier testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal testing are possible if the disease-causing mutations in the family are known. The Genetic Testing Registry (GTR) is a centralized online resource for information about genetic tests. The intended audience for the GTR is health care providers and researchers. Patients and consumers with specific questions about a genetic test should contact a health care provider or a genetics professional. How is congenital adrenal hyperplasia diagnosed? Shortly after birth, all newborns in the United States are screened for a variety of conditions, including 21-hydroxylase deficiency. This is the most common cause of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) and accounts for 95% of classic CAH cases. Nonclassic CAH is not detected through newborn screening and is often not suspected until signs and symptoms of the condition begin to appear later in childhood or early adulthood. In these cases, a diagnosis of CAH is usually based on physical examination; blood and urine tests that measure hormone levels; and/or genetic testing. An X-ray may also be helpful in confirming the diagnosis in children since CAH can cause bones to grow and develop more quickly than usual (advanced bone age) .
 The best treatment options for congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) depend on many factors including the type of CAH and the signs and symptoms present in each person. Many people with CAH require steroids to replace the low hormones. These medications will need to be taken daily throughout life or the symptoms of CAH may return. It is important that affected people on medications be closely followed by their healthcare provider because their dose may need to be adjusted at different times in life such as periods of high stress or illness. Girls with severe CAH who are born with ambiguous genitalia may undergo surgery to ensure proper function and/or to make the genitals look more female. For more information on the treatment of CAH, please click here.
Non-classic congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency (NCAH) is a milder and later onset form of a genetic condition known as congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Some people affected by the condition have no associated signs and symptoms while others experience symptoms of androgen (male hormone) excess. Women with NCAH are generally born with normal female genitalia. Later in life, signs and symptoms of the condition can vary but may include hirsutism, frontal baldness, delayed menarche (first period), menstrual irregularities, and infertility. Little has been published about males with NCAH. They may have early beard growth and relatively small testes. Typically, they have normal sperm counts. NCAH is caused by changes (mutations) in the CYP21A2 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment is only necessary in people who are symptomatic and may include a glucocorticoid called dexamethasone.
signs and symptoms of non-classic congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency (NCAH) may develop any time after birth. Affected people generally experience symptoms of androgen (male hormone) excess such as acne, premature development of pubic hair, accelerated growth, advanced bone age, and reduced adult height. Women with NCAH are generally born with normal female genitalia. Later in life, signs and symptoms of the condition can vary but may include hirsutism, frontal baldness, delayed menarche (first period), menstrual irregularities, and infertility. Little has been published about males with NCAH. They may have early beard growth and relatively small testes. Typically, they have normal sperm counts. Some men and women affected by NCAH have no signs or symptoms of the condition. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Non-classic congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the thorax - Adrenal hyperplasia - Adrenogenital syndrome - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Fever - Growth abnormality - Gynecomastia - Hypertension - Hypoglycemia - Hypospadias - Renal salt wasting - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Non-classic congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency (NCAH) is caused by changes (mutations) in the CYP21A2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called 21-hydroxylase, which is found in the adrenal glands. The adrenal glands are cone-shaped organs that sit on top of the kidneys and are responsible for releasing various types of hormones that the body needs to function. Mutations in CYP21A2 lead to deficient levels of 21-hydroxylase which cause low levels of hormones such as cortisol and/or aldosterone and an overproduction of androgens (male hormones such as testosterone). Cortisol is a hormone that affects energy levels, blood sugar levels, blood pressure, and the body's response to stress, illness, and injury. Aldosterone helps the body maintain the proper level of sodium (salt) and water and helps maintain blood pressure. Irregular levels of these hormones lead to the signs and symptoms of NCAH. The amount of functional 21-hydroxylase enzyme determines the severity of the disorder. People with NCAH have CYP21A2 mutations that result in the production of reduced amounts of the enzyme, but more enzyme than the classic form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
 Non-classic congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency (NCAH) is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that to be affected, a person must have a mutation in both copies of the responsible gene in each cell. The parents of an affected person usually each carry one mutated copy of the gene and are referred to as carriers. Carriers typically do not show signs or symptoms of the condition. When two carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be a carrier like each of the parents, and a 25% chance to not have the condition and not be a carrier.
 A diagnosis of non-classic congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency (NCAH) is often suspected based on the presence of characteristic signs and symptoms. Additional testing can then be ordered to confirm the diagnosis. This may include a blood test to measure the concentration of 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17-OHP) and/or an adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulation test. An ACTH stimulation test involves measuring the concentration of 17-OHP in the blood before ACTH is administered and 60 min after ACTH is given.
 In some cases, people affected by non-classic congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency (NCAH) may not require any treatment. Many are asymptomatic throughout their lives, although symptoms may develop during puberty, after puberty, or post partum. If symptoms are present, a glucocorticoid called dexamethasone is often recommended. Dexamethasone can treat irregular menstruation, acne, and excess body hair (hirsutism).
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due to 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency is one of a group of disorders (collectively called congenital adrenal hyperplasia) that affect the adrenal glands. The adrenal glands are located on top of the kidneys and produce a variety of hormones that regulate many essential functions in the body. In people with CAH due to 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency, the adrenal glands produce excess androgens, which are male sex hormones.  There are two types of CAH due to 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency, the classic form and the non-classic form. The classic form is the more severe of the two types.  Females with the classic form of CAH due to 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency have external genitalia that do not look clearly male or female (ambiguous genitalia). However, the internal reproductive organs develop normally. Males and females with the classic form of this condition have early development of their secondary sexual characteristics such as growth of facial and pubic hair, deepening of the voice, appearance of acne, and onset of a growth spurt. The early growth spurt can prevent growth later in adolescence and lead to short stature in adulthood. In addition, approximately two-thirds of individuals with the classic form of CAH due to 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency have high blood pressure (hypertension). Hypertension typically develops within the first year of life.  Females with the non-classic form of CAH due to 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency have normal female genitalia. As affected females get older, they may develop excessive body hair growth (hirsutism) and irregular menstruation. Males with the non-classic form of this condition do not typically have any signs or symptoms except for short stature. Hypertension is not a feature of the non-classic form of CAH due to 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency.
CAH due to 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency accounts for 5 to 8 percent of all cases of congenital adrenal hyperplasia. It is estimated that CAH due to 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency occurs in 1 in 100,000 to 200,000 newborns. This condition is more common in Moroccan Jews living in Israel, occurring in approximately 1 in 5,000 to 7,000 newborns. The classic form of CAH due to 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency appears to be much more common than the non-classic form.
Mutations in the CYP11B1 gene cause CAH due to 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency. The CYP11B1 gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called 11-beta-hydroxylase. This enzyme is found in the adrenal glands, where it helps produce hormones called cortisol and corticosterone. Cortisol has numerous functions, such as maintaining blood sugar levels, protecting the body from stress, and suppressing inflammation. Corticosterone gets converted to the hormone aldosterone, which helps control blood pressure by maintaining proper salt and fluid levels in the body.  CAH due to 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency is caused by a shortage (deficiency) of the 11-beta-hydroxylase enzyme. When 11-beta-hydroxylase is lacking, precursors that are used to form cortisol and corticosterone build up in the adrenal glands and are converted to androgens. The excess production of androgens leads to abnormalities of sexual development, particularly in females with CAH due to 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency. A buildup in the precursors used to form corticosterone increases salt retention, leading to hypertension in individuals with the classic form of CAH due to 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency.  The amount of functional 11-beta-hydroxylase enzyme that an individual produces typically determines the extent of abnormal sexual development. Individuals with the classic form of the condition usually have CYP11B1 gene mutations that result in the production of an enzyme with low levels of function or no function at all. Individuals with the non-classic form of the condition typically have CYP11B1 gene mutations that lead to the production of an enzyme with moderately reduced function. The severity of the signs and symptoms of sexual development do not appear to be related to the severity of the hypertension.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Deficiency of steroid 11-beta-monooxygenase  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care