Connective tissue is the material inside your body that supports many of its parts. It is the "cellular glue" that gives your tissues their shape and helps keep them strong. It also helps some of your tissues do their work. Cartilage and fat are examples of connective tissue.      There are over 200 disorders that impact connective tissue. Some, like cellulitis, are the result of an infection. Injuries can cause connective tissue disorders, such as scars. Others, such as Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, Marfan syndrome, and osteogenesis imperfecta, are genetic. Still others, like scleroderma, have no known cause. Each disorder has its own symptoms and needs different treatment.
Mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD) is a rare autoimmune disorder that is characterized by features commonly seen in three different connective tissue disorders: systemic lupus erythematosus, scleroderma, and polymyositis. Some affected people may also have symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis. Although MCTD can affect people of all ages, it appears to be most common in women under age 30. Signs and symptoms vary but may include Raynaud's phenomenon; arthritis; heart, lung and skin abnormalities; kidney disease; muscle weakness, and dysfunction of the esophagus. The cause of MCTD is currently unknown. There is no cure but certain medications such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), corticosteroids and immunosuppresive drugs may help manage the symptoms.
 The exact underlying cause of mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD) is currently unknown. It is an autoimmune disorder, which means the immune system mistakes normal, healthy cells for those that that body should "fight off." There are ongoing studies exploring how immune system dysfunction may be involved in the development of this condition.
 The role of genetics in the onset of mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD) is still unclear. Some people with MCTD have family members who are also affected by the condition. This suggests that in some cases, an inherited predisposition may contribute to the development of MCTD. People with an inherited or genetic predisposition have an increased risk of developing a certain condition due to their genes.
 Mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD) is often suspected after a physical examination reveals signs and symptoms associated with the condition. The diagnosis is supported by a blood test that shows high levels of antibodies associated with MCTD.
 There is currently no cure for mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD). However, treatments can help manage symptoms of the condition. For example, medications such as over-the-counter or prescription nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may help with inflammation and pain of the muscles or joints. Glucocorticoids may be recommended in certain situations, such as during disease flares or when complications arise (e.g., aseptic meningitis, myositis, pleurisy, pericarditis, and myocarditis). Some people with MCTD require long term use of immunosuppressant medications. Additional medications may be prescribed based on the signs and symptoms present in each person. For example, if a person with MCTD has developed symptoms similar to those of lupus, medications typically prescribed for people with lupus may be recommended. For additional information about the treatment of MCTD, visit the Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research Web site.