Congenital contractural arachnodactyly (CCA) is a genetic disorder that is typically characterized by tall height; skinny, long limbs; long, skinny fingers and toes (arachnodactyly); multiple joint deformities present at birth (congenital contractures), usually of the elbows, knees, hips, fingers and ankles; "crumpled"-looking ears, and curvature of the spine (kyphoscoliosis). Other features might also be present and vary from person to person. CCA is caused by mutations in a gene called FBN2 gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. CCA shares similiar signs and symptoms to Marfan syndrome; however, Marfan syndrome is not caused by mutations in the FBN2 gene.
 Congenital contractural arachnodactyly is caused by mutations in the FBN2 gene. The FBN2 gene provides instructions for producing the fibrillin-2 protein. Fibrillin-2 binds to other proteins and molecules to form threadlike filaments called microfibrils. Microfibrils become part of the fibers that provide strength and flexibility to connective tissue. Additionally, microfibrils hold molecules called growth factors and release them at the appropriate time to control the growth and repair of tissues and organs throughout the body. A mutation in the FBN2 gene can reduce the amount and/or quality of fibrillin-2 that is available to form microfibrils. As a result, decreased microfibril formation weakens the elastic fibers and allows growth factors to be released inappropriately, causing tall stature, deformities of the fingers and toes, and other characteristic features of congenital contractural arachnodactyly.
How  This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from an affected parent. Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
 Physical therapy for joint contractures helps increase joint mobility and ameliorate the effects of muscle hypoplasia (usually in the calf muscles). In severe cases, surgical release may be necessary. Since the kyphosis/scoliosis tends to be progressive, bracing and/or surgical correction is often needed. Consultation with an orthopedist is encouraged. Other symptoms, if present, should be addressed as they arise and in the standard manner. Regular physician visits should be scheduled to monitor symptom progression and development.
Congenital contractural arachnodactyly is a disorder that affects many parts of the body. People with this condition typically are tall with long limbs (dolichostenomelia) and long, slender fingers and toes (arachnodactyly). They often have permanently bent joints (contractures) that can restrict movement in their hips, knees, ankles, or elbows. Additional features of congenital contractural arachnodactyly include underdeveloped muscles, a rounded upper back that also curves to the side (kyphoscoliosis), permanently bent fingers and toes (camptodactyly), ears that look "crumpled," and a protruding chest (pectus carinatum). Rarely, people with congenital contractural arachnodactyly have heart defects such as an enlargement of the blood vessel that distributes blood from the heart to the rest of the body (aortic root dilatation) or a leak in one of the valves that control blood flow through the heart (mitral valve prolapse). The life expectancy of individuals with congenital contractural arachnodactyly varies depending on the severity of symptoms but is typically not shortened.  A rare, severe form of congenital contractural arachnodactyly involves both heart and digestive system abnormalities in addition to the skeletal features described above; individuals with this severe form of the condition usually do not live past infancy.
The prevalence of congenital contractural arachnodactyly is estimated to be less than 1 in 10,000 worldwide.
Mutations in the FBN2 gene cause congenital contractural arachnodactyly. The FBN2 gene provides instructions for producing the fibrillin-2 protein. Fibrillin-2 binds to other proteins and molecules to form threadlike filaments called microfibrils. Microfibrils become part of the fibers that provide strength and flexibility to connective tissue that supports the body's joints and organs. Additionally, microfibrils regulate the activity of molecules called growth factors. Growth factors enable the growth and repair of tissues throughout the body.  Mutations in the FBN2 gene can decrease fibrillin-2 production or result in the production of a protein with impaired function. As a result, microfibril formation is reduced, which probably weakens the structure of connective tissue and disrupts regulation of growth factor activity. The resulting abnormalities of connective tissue underlie the signs and symptoms of congenital contractural arachnodactyly.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of congenital contractural arachnodactyly:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Congenital Contractural Arachnodactyly  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital contractural arachnodactyly  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Arachnodactyly  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Contracture Deformity  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Skeletal Limb Abnormalities   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care