Smoking Most cases of COPD develop over time, from breathing in fumes and other things that irritate the lungs. Some of the things that put you at risk for COPD include smoking, environmental exposure, and genetic factors. Cigarette smoking is the most common cause of COPD in the United States (either current or former smokers). Pipe, cigar, and other types of tobacco smoking can also cause COPD, especially if the smoke is inhaled. Environmental Exposure COPD can also occur in people who have had long-term exposure to things that can irritate your lungs, like chemical fumes, or dust from the environment or workplace. Heavy or long-term exposure to secondhand smoke or other air pollutants may also contribute to COPD even if you have never smoked or had long-term exposure to harmful pollutants. Secondhand smoke is smoke in the air from other people smoking. Genetic Factors In a small number of people, COPD is caused by a genetic condition known as alpha-1 antitrypsin, or AAT, deficiency. People who have this condition have low levels of alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT)a protein made in the liver. Having a low level of the AAT protein can lead to lung damage and COPD if you're exposed to smoke or other lung irritants. If you have this condition and smoke, COPD can worsen very quickly. While very few people know if they have AAT deficiency, it is estimated that about 1 in every 1,600 people to about 1 in every 5,000 people have it. People with AAT deficiency can get COPD even if they have never smoked or had long-term exposure to harmful pollutants. Asthma Although uncommon, some people who have asthma can develop COPD. Asthma is a chronic (long-term) lung disease that inflames and narrows the airways. Treatment usually can reverse the inflammation and narrowing. However, if not, COPD can develop.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or COPD, is a progressive lung disease in which the airways of the lungs become damaged, making it harder to breathe. With COPD, airways become blocked, making it harder to get air in and out.
The most common symptoms of COPD are a cough that does not go away and coughing up a lot of sputum (mucus). These symptoms may occur years before lung damage has reduced the flow of air in and out of the lungs. Other symptoms of COPD include shortness of breath, especially with exercise; wheezing (a whistling sound when you breathe); and tightness in the chest.
To confirm a COPD diagnosis, a doctor will use a breathing test called spirometry. The test is easy and painless. It shows how well the lungs are working. The spirometer measures how much air the lungs can hold and how fast air is blown out of the lungs. Other tests, such as bronchodilator reversibility testing, a chest X-ray, and arterial blood gas test, may be ordered.
Treatment for COPD can be different for each person and is based on whether symptoms are mild, moderate or severe. Treatments include medication, pulmonary or lung rehabilitation, oxygen treatment, and surgery. There are also treatments to manage complications or a sudden onset of symptoms.
If you smoke, the most important thing you can do to prevent more lung damage is to stop smoking. It is also important to stay away from people who smoke and places where you know there will be smokers. Avoid exposure to pollutants like dust, fumes, and poor air quality, and take precautions to prevent flu and pneumonia. Following your doctor's instructions with medications and rehabilitative treatment can help alleviate COPD symptoms and control the disabling effects of the disease.