Coronary microvascular disease (MVD) is heart disease that affects the tiny coronary (heart) arteries. In coronary MVD, the walls of the heart's tiny arteries are damaged or diseased.
                
Coronary MVD is different from traditional coronary heart disease (CHD), also called coronary artery disease. In CHD, a waxy substance called plaque (plak) builds up in the large coronary arteries.
                
Plaque narrows the heart's large arteries and reduces the flow of oxygen-rich blood to your heart muscle. The buildup of plaque also makes it more likely that blood clots will form in your arteries. Blood clots can mostly or completely block blood flow through a coronary artery.
                
In coronary MVD, however, the heart's tiny arteries are affected. Plaque doesn't create blockages in these vessels as it does in the heart's large arteries.
                
Coronary Microvascular Disease
                

                
Overview
                
Both men and women who have coronary microvascular disease often have diabetes or high blood pressure. Some people who have coronary microvascular disease may have inherited heart muscle diseases.
                
Diagnosing coronary microvascular disease has been a challenge for doctors. Standard tests used to diagnose coronary heart disease arent designed to detect coronary microvascular disease. More research is needed to find the best diagnostic tests and treatments for thedisease.
                
Outlook
                
Most of what is known about coronary MVD comes from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute's Wise study (Women's Ischemia Syndrome Evaluation).
                
The WISE study started in 1996. The goal of the study was to learn more about how heart disease develops in women.
                
Currently, research is ongoing to learn more about the role of hormones in heart disease and to find better ways to diagnose coronary MVD.
                
Studies also are under way to learn more about the causes of coronary MVD, how to treat the disease, and the expected health outcomes for people with coronary MVD.
The same risk factors that cause atherosclerosis may cause coronary microvascular disease. Atherosclerosis is a disease in which plaque builds up inside the arteries.
                
Risk factors for atherosclerosis include:
                
Diabetes. It is a disease in which the bodys blood sugar level is too high because the body doesnt make enough insulin or doesnt use its insulin properly.
                
Family history of early heart disease. Your risk of atherosclerosis increases if your father or a brother was diagnosed with heart disease before age 55, or if your mother or a sister was diagnosed with heart disease before age 65.
                
High blood pressure. Blood pressure is considered high if it stays at or above 140/90mmHg over time. If you have diabetes or chronic kidney disease, high blood pressure is defined as 130/80 mmHg or higher. (The mmHg is millimeters of mercurythe units used to measure blood pressure.)
                
Insulin resistance. This condition occurs if the body cant use its insulin properly. Insulin is a hormone that helps move blood sugar into cells where its used for energy. Overtime, insulin resistance can lead to diabetes.
                
Lack of physical activity. Physical inactivity can worsen some other risk factors for atherosclerosis, such as unhealthy blood cholesterol levels, high blood pressure, diabetes, and overweight or obesity.
                
Older age. As you age, your risk for atherosclerosis increases. The process of atherosclerosis begins in youth and typically progresses over many decades before disease develops.
                
Overweight and obesity. The terms overweight and obesity refer to body weight thats greater than what is considered healthy for a certain height.
                
Smoking. Smoking can damage and tighten blood vessels, lead to unhealthy cholesterol levels, and raise blood pressure. Smoking also doesnt allow enough oxygen to reach the bodys tissues.
                
Unhealthy blood cholesterol levels. This includes high LDL (bad) cholesterol and low HDL (good) cholesterol.
                
Unhealthy diet. An unhealthy diet can raise your risk for atherosclerosis. Foods that are high in saturated and trans fats, cholesterol, sodium (salt), and sugar can worsen other risk factors for atherosclerosis.
                
In women, coronary microvascular disease also may be linked to low estrogen levels occurring before or after menopause. Also, the disease may be linked to anemia or conditions that affect blood clotting. Anemia is thought to slow the growth of cells needed to repair damaged blood vessels.
                
Researchers continue to explore other possible causes of coronary microvascular disease.
Coronary microvascular disease can affect both men and women. However, women may be at risk for coronary microvascular disease if they have lower than normal levels of estrogen at any point in their adult lives. (This refers to the estrogen that the ovaries produce, not the estrogen used in hormone therapy.) Low estrogen levels before menopause can raise younger womens risk for the disease. Causes of low estrogen levels in younger women can be mental stress or a problem with the function of theovaries.
                
The causes of coronary microvascular disease and atherosclerosis are also considered risk factors for the disease.
The signs and symptoms of coronary microvascular disease (MVD) often differ from the signs and symptoms of traditional coronary heart disease (CHD).
                
Many women with coronary MVD have angina (an-JI-nuh or AN-juh-nuh). Angina is chest pain or discomfort that occurs when your heart muscle doesn't get enough oxygen-rich blood.
                
Angina may feel like pressure or squeezing in your chest. You also may feel it in your shoulders, arms, neck, jaw, or back. Angina pain may even feel like indigestion.
                
Angina also is a common symptom of CHD. However, the angina that occurs in coronary MVD may differ from the typical angina that occurs in CHD. In coronary MVD, the chest pain usually lasts longer than 10 minutes, and it can last longer than 30 minutes. Typical angina is more common in women older than 65.
                
Other signs and symptoms of coronary MVD are shortness of breath, sleep problems, fatigue (tiredness), and lack of energy.
                
Coronary MVD symptoms often are first noticed during routine daily activities (such as shopping, cooking, cleaning, and going to work) and times of mental stress. It's less likely that women will notice these symptoms during physical activity (such as jogging or walking fast).
                
This differs from CHD, in which symptoms often first appear while a person is being physically activesuch as while jogging, walking on a treadmill, or going up stairs.
Relieving pain is one of the main goals of treating coronary microvascular disease (MVD). Treatments also are used to control risk factors and other symptoms. Treatments may include medicines, such as:
                
ACE inhibitors and beta blockers to lower blood pressure and decrease the hearts workload
                
Aspirin to help prevent blood clots or control inflammation
                
Nitroglycerin to relax blood vessels, improve blood flow to the heart muscle, and treat chest pain
                
Statin medicines to control or lower your blood cholesterol.
                
Take all medicines regularly, as your doctor prescribes. Dont change the amount of your medicine or skip a dose unless your doctor tells you to.
                
If youre diagnosed with coronary MVD and also haveanemia, you may benefit from treatment for that condition. Anemia is thought to slow the growth of cells needed to repair damaged blood vessels.
                
If youre diagnosed with and treated for coronary MVD, you should get ongoing care from your doctor. Research is under way to find the best treatments for coronary MVD.