Costello syndrome is a rare condition that affects many different parts of the body. Signs and symptoms generally include developmental delay, intellectual disability, distinctive facial features, loose folds of extra skin (especially on the hands and feet), and unusually flexible joints. Affected people may also have heart abnormalities such as tachycardia, structural heart defects, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Beginning in early childhood, people with Costello syndrome are at an increased risk of developing certain cancerous and noncancerous tumors. Costello syndrome is caused by changes (mutations) in the HRAS gene. It is considered an autosomal dominant condition; however, almost all reported cases are the result of de novo gene mutations and occur in people with no family history of the condition. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
This condition is very rare; it probably affects 200 to 300 people worldwide. Reported estimates of Costello syndrome prevalence range from 1 in 300,000 to 1 in 1.25 million people.
Mutations in the HRAS gene cause Costello syndrome. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called H-Ras, which is part of a pathway that helps control cell growth and division. Mutations that cause Costello syndrome lead to the production of an H-Ras protein that is abnormally turned on (active). The overactive protein directs cells to grow and divide constantly, which can lead to the development of cancerous and noncancerous tumors. It is unclear how mutations in the HRAS gene cause the other features of Costello syndrome, but many of the signs and symptoms probably result from cell overgrowth and abnormal cell division.  Some people with signs and symptoms of Costello syndrome do not have an identified mutation in the HRAS gene. These individuals may actually have CFC syndrome or Noonan syndrome, which are caused by mutations in related genes. The proteins produced from these genes interact with one another and with the H-Ras protein as part of the same cell growth and division pathway. These interactions help explain why mutations in different genes can cause conditions with overlapping signs and symptoms.
Costello syndrome is considered to be an autosomal dominant condition, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Almost all reported cases have resulted from new gene mutations and have occurred in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Costello syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Costello Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Costello syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care