Crohn's disease causes inflammation of the digestive system. It is one of a group of diseases called inflammatory bowel disease. Crohn's can affect any area from the mouth to the anus. It often affects the lower part of the small intestine called the ileum.    The cause of Crohn's disease is unknown. It may be due to an abnormal reaction by the body's immune system. It also seems to run in some families. It most commonly starts between the ages of 13 and 30.    The most common symptoms are pain in the abdomen and diarrhea. Other symptoms include       - Bleeding from the rectum    - Weight loss    - Fever       Your doctor will diagnose Crohn's disease with a physical exam, lab tests, imaging tests, and a colonoscopy.    Crohn's can cause complications, such as intestinal blockages, ulcers in the intestine, and problems getting enough nutrients. People with Crohn's can also have joint pain and skin problems. Children with the disease may have growth problems.    There is no cure for Crohn's. Treatment can help control symptoms, and may include medicines, nutrition supplements, and/or surgery. Some people have long periods of remission, when they are free of symptoms.    NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
Crohn's disease is a type of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), the general name for conditions that cause inflammation in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Common signs and symptoms include abdominal pain and cramping, diarrhea, and weight loss. Other general symptoms include feeling tired, nausea and loss of appetite, fever, and anemia. Complications of Crohn's disease may include intestinal blockage, fistulas, anal fissures, ulcers, malnutrition, and inflammation in other areas of the body. Crohn's disease can occur in people of all age groups but is most often diagnosed in young adults. The exact cause is unknown, but is thought to involve both genetic and environmental factors. It appears to run in some families. Treatment is aimed at relieving symptoms and reducing inflammation, but some people require surgery.
The exact cause of Crohn's disease is unknown. Researchers believe the following factors may play a role in causing Crohn's disease:
                
- autoimmune reaction  - genes  - environment
                
Autoimmune reaction. Scientists believe one cause of Crohn's disease may be an autoimmune reactionwhen a person's immune system attacks healthy cells in the body by mistake. Normally, the immune system protects the body from infection by identifying and destroying bacteria, viruses, and other potentially harmful foreign substances. Researchers believe bacteria or viruses can mistakenly trigger the immune system to attack the inner lining of the intestines. This immune system response causes the inflammation, leading to symptoms.
                
Genes. Crohn's disease sometimes runs in families. Research has shown that people who have a parent or sibling with Crohn's disease may be more likely to develop the disease. Researchers continue to study the link between genes and Crohn's disease.
                
Environment. Some studies suggest that certain things in the environment may increase the chance of a person getting Crohn's disease, although the overall chance is low. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,1 antibiotics,2 and oral contraceptives2 may slightly increase the chance of developing Crohn's disease. A high-fat diet may also slightly increase the chance of getting Crohn's disease.3
                
Some people incorrectly believe that eating certain foods, stress, or emotional distress can cause Crohn's disease. Emotional distress and eating certain foods do not cause Crohn's disease. Sometimes the stress of living with Crohn's disease can make symptoms worse. Also, some people may find that certain foods can trigger or worsen their symptoms.
The most common signs and symptoms of Crohn's disease are
                
- diarrhea  - abdominal cramping and pain  - weight loss
                
Other general signs and symptoms include
                
- feeling tired  - nausea or loss of appetite  - fever  - anemiaa condition in which the body has fewer red blood cells than normal
                
Signs and symptoms of inflammation outside of the intestines include
                
- joint pain or soreness  - eye irritation  - skin changes that involve red, tender bumps under the skin
                
The symptoms a person experiences can vary depending on the severity of the inflammation and where it occurs.
Researchers have not found that eating, diet, and nutrition cause Crohn's disease symptoms. Good nutrition is important in the management of Crohn's disease, however. Dietary changes can help reduce symptoms. A health care provider may recommend that a person make dietary changes such as
                
- avoiding carbonated drinks  - avoiding popcorn, vegetable skins, nuts, and other high-fiber foods  - drinking more liquids  - eating smaller meals more often  - keeping a food diary to help identify troublesome foods
                
Health care providers may recommend nutritional supplements and vitamins for people who do not absorb enough nutrients.
                
To help ensure coordinated and safe care, people should discuss their use of complementary and alternative medical practices, including their use of dietary supplements and probiotics, with their health care provider. Read more at www.nccam.nih.gov/health/probiotics.
                
Depending on a person's symptoms or medications, a health care provider may recommend a specific diet, such as a
                
- high-calorie diet  - lactose-free diet  - low-fat diet  - low-fiber diet  - low-salt diet
                
People should speak with a health care provider about specific dietary recommendations and changes.
Complications of Crohn's disease can include
                
- bowel obstruction. Crohn's disease can thicken the wall of the intestine. Over time, the thickened areas of the intestine can narrow, which can block the intestine. A partial or complete obstruction, also called a bowel blockage, can block the movement of food or stool through the intestines. A complete bowel obstruction is life threatening and requires immediate medical attention and often surgery.  - fistulasabnormal passages, or tunnels, between two organs, or between an organ and the outside of the body. How a health care provider treats fistulas depends on their type and severity. For some people, fistulas heal with medication and diet changes, while other people will need to have surgery.  - anal fissuressmall tears in the anus that may cause itching, pain, or bleeding. Most anal fissures heal with medical treatment, including ointments, warm baths, and dietary changes.  - ulcers. Inflammation anywhere along the GI tract can lead to ulcers or open sores in a person's mouth, intestines, anus, and perineumthe area between the anus and the sex organs. In most cases, the treatment a health care provider prescribes for Crohn's disease will also treat the ulcers.  - malnutritiona condition that develops when the body does not get the right amount of vitamins, minerals, and nutrients it needs to maintain healthy tissues and organ function. Some people may need IV fluids or feeding tubes to replace lost nutrients and fluids.  - inflammation in other areas of the body. The immune system can trigger inflammation in the      - joints    - eyes    - skin
                
Health care providers can treat inflammation by adjusting medications or prescribing new medications.
                

                
Crohn's Disease and Colon Cancer   People with Crohn's disease in the large intestine may be more likely to develop colon cancer. People who receive ongoing treatment and remain in remission may reduce their chances of developing colon cancer.   People with Crohn's disease should talk with their health care provider about how often they should get screened for colon cancer. Screening can include colonoscopy with biopsies. Such screening does not reduce a person's chances of developing colon cancer. Instead, screening can help diagnose cancer early and improve chances for recovery.
Crohn's disease is a disease that causes inflammation,* or swelling, and irritation of any part of the digestive tractalso called the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. The part most commonly affected is the end part of the small intestine, called the ileum.
                
*See the Pronunciation Guide for tips on how to say the words in bold type.
                
Crohns disease is one of two main forms of diseases of the GI tract named inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). The other form, called ulcerative colitis, affects the large intestine, which includes the colon and the rectumthe lower end of the large intestine, leading to the anus.
                
With Crohns disease, chronicor long lastinginflammation may cause scar tissue to form in the lining of the intestine. When scar tissue builds up, the passage can become narrow, causing food and stool to move through the GI tract more slowlywhich can lead to pain, cramps, and diarrhea.
Both men and women can get Crohn's disease, and it can run in families. People with Crohns disease may have a blood relative with the disease or another type of IBD. Crohns disease most commonly starts between the ages of 13 and 30.
Researchers are studying the possible causes of Crohns disease. Your bodys natural defense system, called the immune system, protects you from infection by fighting against bacteria, viruses, and other things that can make you sick. Researchers believe that with Crohns disease, the immune system attacks harmless bacteria and viruses. During the attack, white blood cells gather in the intestinal lining. The white blood cells cause chronic inflammation, which leads to ulcers, or sores, and damage to the intestines.
                
Other factors associated with Crohns disease are
                
- genesthe traits passed down from your parents  - unknown triggers caused by the environment
Crohn's disease symptoms can be different for each person. The most common symptoms of Crohns disease are
                
- abdominal painoften in the lower right area of the abdomen  - diarrhea  - bleeding in the rectum, which can be seen in a persons underwear, in the toilet, or in a bowel movement; rectal bleeding can be serious and may not stop without medical help  - weight loss  - fever
Your health care provider may start you on a special diet, so you get extra nutrition and calories. High-calorie liquid supplements are often used to give you the extra calories and right amount of vitamins and minerals to keep you healthy. During acute phases of the disease, you may need to receive intravenous nutrition to give the intestine a rest.
                
No foods are known to cause injury or inflammation to the intestine. But foods such as hot spices, alcohol, greasy foods, and milk products may make diarrhea and cramping worse. You should eat a healthy diet and avoid foods that make symptoms worse. Your health care provider may refer you to a dietitian to help you with meal planning.