The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal blistering of the skin 90% Mastocytosis 90% Abnormality of skin pigmentation 50% Hypotension 50% Impaired temperature sensation 50% Pruritus 50% Subcutaneous hemorrhage 50% Thickened skin 50% Urticaria 50% Gastrointestinal hemorrhage 7.5% Hepatomegaly 7.5% Immunologic hypersensitivity 7.5% Leukemia 7.5% Malabsorption 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Cutaneous mastocytosis is a form of mastocytosis that primarily affects the skin. There are three main forms of the condition: maculopapular cutaneous mastocytosis (also called urticaria pigmentosa), solitary cutaneous mastocytoma, and diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis. There is also an exteremely rare form called telangiectasia macularis eruptiva perstans. The signs, symptoms and severity of the condition vary by subtype. Cutaneous mastocytosis is usually caused by changes (mutations) in the KIT gene. Most cases are caused by somatic mutations which are not inherited or passed on to the next generation. However, it can rarely affect more than one family member and be inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Treatment is usually symptomatic and may include oral antihistamines, topical steroids, and/or photochemotherapy.
 Most cases of cutaneous mastocytosis are caused by changes (mutations) in the KIT gene. This gene encodes a protein that helps control many important cellular processes such as cell growth and division; survival; and movement. This protein is also important for the development of certain types of cells, including mast cells (immune cells that are important for the inflammatory response). Certain mutations in the KIT gene can leads to an overproduction of mast cells. In cutaneous mastocytosis, excess mast cells accumulate in the skin, leading to the many signs and symptoms of the condition.
 Most cases of cutaneous mastocytosis are not inherited. They occur spontaneously in families with no history of the condition and are due to somatic changes (mutations) in the KIT gene. Somatic mutations occur after conception and are only present in certain cells. Because they are not present in the germ cells (egg and sperm), they are not passed on to the next generation. Cutaneous mastocytosis can rarely affect more than one family member. In these cases, the condition is typically inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that to be affected, a person only needs a change (mutation) in one copy of the responsible gene in each cell. A person with familial cutaneous mastocytosis has a 50% chance with each pregnancy of passing along the altered gene to his or her child.
 A diagnosis of cutaneous mastocytosis is typically suspected based on the presence of suspicious signs and symptoms. A skin biopsy that reveals a high number of mast cells (immune cells that are important for the inflammatory response) confirms the diagnosis. Unfortunately it can sometimes be difficult to differentiate cutaneous mastocytosis from systemic mastocytosis. Additional tests may, therefore, be ordered to further investigate the risk for systemic disease. A bone marrow biopsy and specialized blood tests may be recommended in adults with cutaneous mastocytosis since they are at a higher risk for systemic mastocytosis. Affected children typically do not undergo a bone marrow biopsy unless blood tests are abnormal.
 Although there is currently no cure for cutaneous mastocytosis, treatments are available to manage the symptoms of the condition. In general, it is recommended that affected people avoid things that trigger or worsen their symptoms when possible. Certain medications such as oral antihistamines and topical steroids are often prescribed to relieve symptoms. Affected adults may also undergo photochemotherapy which can help alleviate itching and improve the appearance of the patches; however, the condition is likely to recur within six to twelve months of the last treatment. People at risk for anaphylactic shock and/or their caregivers should be trained in how to recognize and treat this life-threatening reaction and should carry an epinephrine autoinjector at all times.