The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 1 aplasia cutis congenita. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Skull defect 3/3 Aplasia cutis congenita of scalp - Motor axonal neuropathy - Sensory axonal neuropathy - X-linked recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Aplasia cutis congenita is a condition in which there is congenital (present from birth) absence of skin, with or without the absence of underlying structures such as bone. It most commonly affects the scalp, but any location of the body can be affected. While most people with aplasia cutis congenita have no other abnormalities, some people have congenital malformations involving the cardiovascular (heart), gastrointestinal, genitourinary, and central nervous systems. The cause of this condition is unclear and appears to be multifactorial (many different factors appear to play a role); contributing factors may include teratogens, genes, trauma, and compromised skin perfusion.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Aplasia cutis congenita. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Skull defect 90% Spinal dysraphism 90% Skin ulcer 50% Abnormality of bone mineral density 7.5% Abnormality of coagulation 7.5% Facial palsy 7.5% Aplasia cutis congenita over the scalp vertex - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Autosomal recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 There is no one cause for all cases of aplasia cutis congenita. The condition is thought to be multifactorial, which means that several factors likely interact to cause the condition. Factors that may contribute include genetic factors; teratogens (exposures during pregnancy that can harm a developing fetus) such as methimazole, carbimazole, misoprostol, and valproic acid; compromised vasculature to the skin; and trauma. Some cases may represent an incomplete or unusual form of a neural tube defect. Familial cases of aplasia cutis congenita have been reported. Cases that appear to be genetic may be inherited in an autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive manner.
 The management of aplasia cutis congenita of the scalp is controversial.; both surgical and conservative treatment modalities have their proponents and opponents. The decision to use medical, surgical, or both forms of therapy in aplasia cutis congenita depends primarily on the size, depth, and location of the skin defect. Local therapy includes gentle cleansing and the application of bland ointment or silver sulfadiazine ointment to keep the area moist. Antibiotics may be utilized if overt signs of infection are noted. In many cases, other treatment is not necessary because the erosions and the ulcerations almost always heal on their own. Recently, a variety of specialized dressing materials have been developed and used. Surgical repair is not usually indicated if the defect is small. Recovery is generally uneventful, with gradual epithelialization and formation of a hairless, atrophic scar over several weeks. Small underlying bony defects usually close spontaneously during the first year of life. Surgical repair of large or multiple scalp defects may require excision with primary closure, if feasible, or the use of tissue expanders and rotation of a flap to fill the defect. On occasion, skin and bone grafts may also be required.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Aplasia cutis congenita intestinal lymphangiectasia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal hair quantity 90% Lymphedema 90% Single transverse palmar crease 90% Skull defect 90% Clinodactyly of the 5th finger 50% Decreased antibody level in blood 50% Hypoproteinemia 50% Lymphopenia 50% Malabsorption 50% Abnormality of coagulation 7.5% Chorioretinal coloboma 7.5% Myopia 7.5% Abnormal bleeding - Abnormality of the paranasal sinuses - Aplasia cutis congenita over the scalp vertex - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Generalized edema - Intestinal lymphangiectasia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Aplasia cutis congenita of limbs recessive. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Finger syndactyly 7.5% Skin ulcer 7.5% Toe syndactyly 7.5% Aplasia cutis congenita - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Congenital absence of skin of limbs - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Nonsyndromic aplasia cutis congenita is a condition in which babies are born with localized areas of missing skin (lesions). These areas resemble ulcers or open wounds, although they are sometimes already healed at birth. Lesions most commonly occur on the top of the head (skull vertex), although they can be found on the torso or limbs. In some cases, the bone and other tissues under the skin defect are also underdeveloped.  Most affected babies have a single lesion. The lesions vary in size and can be differently shaped: some are round or oval, others rectangular, and still others star-shaped. They usually leave a scar after they heal. When the scalp is involved, there may be an absence of hair growth (alopecia) in the affected area.  When the underlying bone and other tissues are involved, affected individuals are at higher risk of infections. If these severe defects occur on the head, the membrane that covers the brain (the dura mater) may be exposed, and life-threatening bleeding may occur from nearby vessels.  Skin lesions are typically the only feature of nonsyndromic aplasia cutis congenita, although other skin problems and abnormalities of the bones and other tissues occur rarely. However, the characteristic skin lesions can occur as one of many symptoms in other conditions, including Johanson-Blizzard syndrome and Adams-Oliver syndrome. These instances are described as syndromic aplasia cutis congenita.
Aplasia cutis congenita affects approximately 1 in 10,000 newborns. The incidence of the nonsyndromic form is unknown.
Nonsyndromic aplasia cutis congenita can have different causes, and often the cause is unknown. Because the condition is sometimes found in multiple members of a family, it is thought to have a genetic component; however, the genetic factors are not fully understood. Researchers suggest that genes important for skin growth may be involved. It is thought that impairments of skin growth more commonly affect the skin at the top of the head because that region needs to be able to grow quickly to cover the fast-growing skull of a developing baby.  In some cases, nonsyndromic aplasia cutis congenita is caused by exposure to a drug called methimazole before birth. This medication is given to treat an overactive thyroid gland. Babies whose mothers take this medication during pregnancy are at increased risk of having the condition. In addition, certain viral infections in a pregnant mother can cause the baby to be born with the skin lesions characteristic of nonsyndromic aplasia cutis congenita. Other cases are thought to be caused by injury to the baby during development.
Most cases of nonsyndromic aplasia cutis congenita are sporadic, which means they occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. When the condition runs in families, inheritance usually follows an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of an altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Rarely, the condition appears to follow an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance, which means both copies of a gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of nonsyndromic aplasia cutis congenita:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Aplasia cutis congenita   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care