Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Deafness with labyrinthine aplasia microtia and microdontia (LAMM). If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the cranial nerves 90% Microdontia 90% Abnormality of the nares 50% Long face 50% Pointed chin 50% Wide nasal bridge 50% Abnormal nasal morphology 7.5% Anterior creases of earlobe 7.5% Hypermetropia 7.5% Hypertelorism 7.5% Increased number of teeth 7.5% Preauricular skin tag 7.5% Reduced number of teeth 7.5% Strabismus 7.5% Synophrys 7.5% Tall stature 7.5% Anteverted ears - Aplasia of the inner ear - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Conical tooth - Delayed gross motor development - Microtia, first degree - Profound sensorineural hearing impairment - Skin tags - Widely spaced teeth - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Congenital deafness with labyrinthine aplasia, microtia, and microdontia (also called LAMM syndrome) is a condition that affects development of the ears and teeth. In people with this condition, the structures that form the inner ear are usually completely absent (labyrinthine aplasia). Rarely, affected individuals have some underdeveloped inner ear structures in one or both ears. The abnormalities of the inner ear cause a form of hearing loss called sensorineural deafness that is present from birth (congenital). Because the inner ear is important for balance as well as hearing, development of motor skills, such as sitting and crawling, may be delayed in affected infants. In addition, people with LAMM syndrome often have abnormally small outer ears (microtia) with narrow ear canals. They can also have unusually small, widely spaced teeth (microdontia).
LAMM syndrome is a rare condition, although its prevalence is unknown. Approximately a dozen affected families have been identified.
LAMM syndrome is caused by mutations in the FGF3 gene, which provides instructions for making a protein called fibroblast growth factor 3 (FGF3). By attaching to another protein known as a receptor, the FGF3 protein triggers a cascade of chemical reactions inside the cell that signal the cell to undergo certain changes, such as dividing or maturing to take on specialized functions. During development before birth, the signals triggered by the FGF3 protein stimulate cells to form the structures that make up the inner ears. The FGF3 protein is also involved in the development of many other organs and structures, including the outer ears and teeth.  FGF3 gene mutations involved in LAMM syndrome alter the FGF3 protein. The altered protein likely has reduced or absent function and is unable to stimulate signaling. The loss of FGF3 function impairs development of the ears and teeth, which leads to the characteristic features of LAMM syndrome.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of LAMM syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Congenital Deafness with Labyrinthine Aplasia, Microtia, and Microdontia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Deafness with labyrinthine aplasia microtia and microdontia (LAMM)   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care