The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Pyruvate decarboxylase deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal facial shape 35% Abnormality of eye movement - Agenesis of corpus callosum - Anteverted nares - Apneic episodes precipitated by illness, fatigue, stress - Basal ganglia cysts - Cerebral atrophy - Choreoathetosis - Chronic lactic acidosis - Decreased activity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) complex - Dystonia - Episodic ataxia - Flared nostrils - Frontal bossing - Hyperalaninemia - Increased CSF lactate - Increased serum lactate - Infantile onset - Intellectual disability - Lethargy - Long philtrum - Microcephaly - Muscular hypotonia - Phenotypic variability - Ptosis - Seizures - Severe lactic acidosis - Small for gestational age - Ventriculomegaly - Wide nasal bridge - X-linked dominant inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Cognitive impairment 90% Abnormality of the cardiovascular system 50% Constipation 50% Hypoglycemia 50% Muscular hypotonia 50% Seizures 50% Pachygyria 5% Abdominal pain - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Chronic constipation - Diarrhea - Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy - Ketosis - Lactic acidosis - Metabolic acidosis - Short stature - Vomiting - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency is a condition that prevents the body from converting certain fats to energy. The signs and symptoms of this disorder typically appear in early childhood. Almost all affected children have delayed development. Additional signs and symptoms can include weak muscle tone (hypotonia), seizures, diarrhea, vomiting, and low blood sugar (hypoglycemia). A heart condition called cardiomyopathy, which weakens and enlarges the heart muscle, is another common feature of malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency.
This condition is very rare; fewer than 30 cases have been reported.
Mutations in the MLYCD gene cause malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency. The MLYCD gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called malonyl-CoA decarboxylase. Within cells, this enzyme helps regulate the formation and breakdown of a group of fats called fatty acids. Many tissues, including the heart muscle, use fatty acids as a major source of energy.  Mutations in the MLYCD gene reduce or eliminate the function of malonyl-CoA decarboxylase. A shortage of this enzyme disrupts the normal balance of fatty acid formation and breakdown in the body. As a result, fatty acids cannot be converted to energy, which can lead to characteristic features of this disorder including low blood sugar and cardiomyopathy. Byproducts of fatty acid processing build up in tissues, which also contributes to the signs and symptoms of malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency:  - Baby's First Test  - Genetic Testing Registry: Deficiency of malonyl-CoA decarboxylase   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care