Congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency (CSID) is a genetic condition that affects a person's ability to digest certain sugars. People with this condition cannot break down the sugars sucrose (a sugar found in fruits, and also known as table sugar) and maltose (the sugar found in grains). CSID usually becomes apparent after an infant begins to consume fruits, juices, and grains. After ingestion of sucrose or maltose, an affected child will typically experience stomach cramps, bloating, excess gas production, and diarrhea. These digestive problems can lead to failure to thrive and malnutrition. Most affected children are better able to tolerate sucrose and maltose as they get older. CSID is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern and is caused by mutations in the SI gene.
 Affected infants usually develop symptoms soon after they first ingest sucrose, which is found in modified milk formulas, fruits, or starches. Symptoms may include explosive, watery diarrhea resulting in abnormally low levels of body fluids (dehydration), abdominal swelling (distension), and/or abdominal discomfort. In addition, some affected infants may experience malnutrition, resulting from malabsorption of essential nutrients, and/or failure to thrive, resulting from nutritional deficiencies. In some cases, individuals may exhibit irritability; colic; abrasion and/or irritation (excoriation) of the skin on the buttocks as a result of prolonged diarrhea episodes; and/or vomiting. Symptoms of this disorder vary among affected individuals, but are usually more severe in infants and young children than in adults. Symptoms exhibited in infants and young children are usually more pronounced than those of the affected adults because the diet of younger individuals often includes a higher carbohydrate intake. In addition, the time it takes for intestinal digestion is less in infants or young children. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of metabolism/homeostasis - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Diarrhea - Malabsorption - Nephrolithiasis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 CSID can be diagnosed through clinical evaluation, detailed patient history, and tolerance lab tests. Blood tests can be done to look for a flat serum glucose curve after patients are given a dose of sucrose. In addition, blood and urine samples may test positive for sucrose, maltose, or palatinose (a form of maltose) if used during tolerance testing. The feces may also show sucrose, glucose, and fructose, and an acid pH level of below 5.0 or 6.0.  CSID can be confirmed by taking a small sample of tissue (biopsy) from the small intestine and measuring the activity of the enzyme called sucrase-isomaltase. Other tests may include a sucrose hydrogen breath test in which an abnormally high level of hydrogen will be detected in the breath of an affected individual after sucrose ingestion.
 CSID is typically treated by modifying a person's diet to reduce the amount of sucrose. Because many foods contain sucrose and other complex sugars, it can be difficult to completely remove sucrase from the diet. Sucraid is an oral medication containing the enzyme that does not work properly in people with this condition. By taking this medication, those with CSID can eat sucrose-containing foods because this enzyme will break down sucrose. This medication must be taken with each meal or snack.
Congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency is a disorder that affects a person's ability to digest certain sugars. People with this condition cannot break down the sugars sucrose and maltose. Sucrose (a sugar found in fruits, and also known as table sugar) and maltose (the sugar found in grains) are called disaccharides because they are made of two simple sugars. Disaccharides are broken down into simple sugars during digestion. Sucrose is broken down into glucose and another simple sugar called fructose, and maltose is broken down into two glucose molecules. People with congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency cannot break down the sugars sucrose and maltose, and other compounds made from these sugar molecules (carbohydrates).  Congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency usually becomes apparent after an infant is weaned and starts to consume fruits, juices, and grains. After ingestion of sucrose or maltose, an affected child will typically experience stomach cramps, bloating, excess gas production, and diarrhea. These digestive problems can lead to failure to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive) and malnutrition. Most affected children are better able to tolerate sucrose and maltose as they get older.
The prevalence of congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency is estimated to be 1 in 5,000 people of European descent. This condition is much more prevalent in the native populations of Greenland, Alaska, and Canada, where as many as 1 in 20 people may be affected.
Mutations in the SI gene cause congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency. The SI gene provides instructions for producing the enzyme sucrase-isomaltase. This enzyme is found in the small intestine and is responsible for breaking down sucrose and maltose into their simple sugar components. These simple sugars are then absorbed by the small intestine. Mutations that cause this condition alter the structure, disrupt the production, or impair the function of sucrase-isomaltase. These changes prevent the enzyme from breaking down sucrose and maltose, causing the intestinal discomfort seen in individuals with congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Sucrase-isomaltase deficiency  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Abdominal bloating  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Inborn errors of metabolism  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Malabsorption   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care