Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AAT deficiency) is an inherited condition that raises your risk for lung and liver disease. Alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) is a protein that protects the lungs. The liver makes it. If the AAT proteins aren't the right shape, they get stuck in the liver cells and can't reach the lungs.    Symptoms of AAT deficiency include       - Shortness of breath and wheezing    - Repeated lung infections    - Tiredness    - Rapid heartbeat upon standing    - Vision problems    - Weight loss       Some people have no symptoms and do not develop complications.    Blood tests and genetic tests can tell if you have it. If your lungs are affected, you may also have lung tests. Treatments include medicines, pulmonary rehab, and extra oxygen, if needed. Severe cases may need a lung transplant. Not smoking can prevent or delay lung symptoms.    NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is a disorder that causes a deficiency or absence of the alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) protein in the blood. AAT is made in the liver and sent through the bloodstream to the lungs, to protect the lungs from damage. Having low levels of ATT (or no ATT) can allow the lungs to become damaged, making breathing hard. Age of onset and severity of AATD can vary based on how much ATT an affected person is missing. In adults, symptoms may include shortness of breath; reduced ability to exercise; wheezing; respiratory infections; fatigue; vision problems; and weight loss. Some people have chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or asthma. Liver disease (cirrhosis) may occur in affected children or adults. Rarely, AATD can cause a skin condition called panniculitis. AATD is caused by mutations in the SERPINA1 gene and is inherited in a codominant manner. Treatment is based on each person's symptoms and may include bronchodilators; antibiotics for upper respiratory tract infections; intravenous therapy of AAT; and/or lung transplantation in severe cases.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Emphysema 90% Hepatic failure 90% Hepatomegaly 50% Nephrotic syndrome 7.5% Cirrhosis 5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease - Elevated hepatic transaminases - Hepatocellular carcinoma - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is caused by mutations in the SERPINA1 gene. This gene gives the body instructions to make a protein called alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT), which protects the body from an enzyme called neutrophil elastase. Neutrophil elastase helps the body fight infections, but it can also attack healthy tissues (especially the lungs) if not controlled by AAT. Mutations that cause AAT can cause a deficiency or absence of AAT, or a form of AAT that does not work well. This allows neutrophil elastase to destroy lung tissue, causing lung disease. In addition, abnormal AAT can build up in the liver and cause damage to the liver. The severity of AATD may also be worsened by environmental factors such as exposure to tobacco smoke, dust, and chemicals.
 Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) may first be suspected in people with evidence of liver disease at any age, or lung disease (such as emphysema), especially when there is no obvious cause or it is diagnosed at a younger age. Confirming the diagnosis involves a blood test showing a low serum concentration of the alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) protein, and either: detecting a functionally deficient AAT protein variant by isoelectric focusing (a method for detecting mutations); or detecting SERPINA1 gene mutations on both copies of the gene with molecular genetic testing. (This confirms the diagnosis when the above-mentioned tests are not performed or their results are not in agreement.) Specialists involved in the diagnosis may include primary care doctors, pulmonologists (lung specialists), and/or hepatologists (liver specialists).
 Treatment of alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) depends on the symptoms and severity in each person. COPD and other related lung diseases are typically treated with standard therapy. Bronchodilators and inhaled steroids can help open the airways and make breathing easier. Intravenous augmentation therapy (regular infusion of purified, human AAT to increase AAT concentrations) has been recommended for people with established fixed airflow obstruction (determined by a specific lung function test). This therapy raises the level of the AAT protein in the blood and lungs. Lung transplantation may be an appropriate option for people with end-stage lung disease. Liver transplantation is the definitive treatment for advanced liver disease. When present, panniculitis may resolve on its own or after dapsone or doxycycline therapy. When this therapy does not help, it has responded to intravenous augmentation therapy in higher than usual doses. All people with severe AATD should have pulmonary function tests every 6 to 12 months. Those with ATT serum concentrations 10% to 20% of normal should have periodic evaluation of liver function to detect liver disease. People with established liver disease should have periodic ultrasounds of the liver to monitor for fibrotic changes and liver cancer (hepatocellular carcinoma). Yearly vaccinations against influenza and pneumococcus are recommended to lessen the progression of lung disease. Vaccination against hepatitis A and B is recommended to lessen the risk of liver disease. People with AATD should avoid smoking and occupations with exposure to environmental pollutants. Parents, older and younger siblings, and children of a person with severe AATD should be evaluated to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from treatment and preventive measures.
Alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency is an inherited disease. "Inherited" means it's passed from parents to children through genes.
                
Children who have AAT deficiency inherit two faulty AAT genes, one from each parent. These genes tell cells in the body how to make AAT proteins.
                
In AAT deficiency, the AAT proteins made in the liver aren't the right shape. Thus, they get stuck in the liver cells. The proteins can't get to the organs in the body that they protect, such as the lungs. Without the AAT proteins protecting the organs, diseases can develop.
                
The most common faulty gene that can cause AAT deficiency is called PiZ. If you inherit two PiZ genes (one from each parent), you'll have AAT deficiency.
                
If you inherit a PiZ gene from one parent and a normal AAT gene from the other parent, you won't have AAT deficiency. However, you might pass the PiZ gene to your children.
                
Even if you inherit two faulty AAT genes, you may not have any related complications. You may never even realize that you have AAT deficiency.
Alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency occurs in all ethnic groups. However, the condition occurs most often in White people of European descent.
                
AAT deficiency is an inherited condition. "Inherited" means the condition is passed from parents to children through genes.
                
If you have bloodline relatives with known AAT deficiency, you're at increased risk for the condition. Even so, it doesn't mean that you'll develop one of the diseases related to the condition.
                
Some risk factors make it more likely that you'll develop lung disease if you have AAT deficiency. Smoking is the leading risk factor for serious lung disease if you have AAT deficiency. Your risk for lung disease also may go up if you're exposed to dust, fumes, or other toxic substances.
The first lung-related symptoms of alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency may include shortness of breath, less ability to be physically active, and wheezing. These signs and symptoms most often begin between the ages of 20 and 40.
                
Other signs and symptoms may include repeated lung infections, tiredness, a rapid heartbeat upon standing, vision problems, and weight loss.
                
Some people who have severe AAT deficiency develop emphysema (em-fi-SE-ma)often when they're only in their forties or fifties. Signs and symptoms of emphysema include problems breathing, wheezing, and a chronic (ongoing) cough.
                
At first, many people who have AAT deficiency are diagnosed with asthma. This is because wheezing also is a symptom of asthma. Also, people who have AAT deficiency respond well to asthma medicines.
Alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency usually is diagnosed after you develop a lung or liver disease that's related to the condition.
                
Your doctor may suspect AAT deficiency if you have signs or symptoms of a serious lung condition, especially emphysema, without any obvious cause. He or she also may suspect AAT deficiency if you develop emphysema when you're 45 years old or younger.
                
Specialists Involved
                
Many doctors may be involved in the diagnosis of AAT deficiency. These include primary care doctors, pulmonologists (lung specialists), and hepatologists (liver specialists).
                
To diagnose AAT deficiency, your doctor will:
                
Ask about possible risk factors. Risk factors include smoking and exposure to dust, fumes, and other toxic substances.
                
Ask about your medical history. A common sign of AAT deficiency is if you have a lung or liver disease without any obvious causes or risk factors. Another sign is if you have emphysema at an unusually early age (45 years or younger).
                
Ask about your family's medical history. If you have bloodline relatives who have AAT deficiency, you're more likely to have the condition.
                
Diagnostic Tests
                
Your doctor may recommend tests to confirm a diagnosis of AAT deficiency. He or she also may recommend tests to check for lung- or liver-related conditions.
                
A genetic test is the most certain way to check for AAT deficiency. This test will show whether you have faulty AAT genes.
                
A blood test also may be used. This test checks the level of AAT protein in your blood. If the level is a lot lower than normal, it's likely that you have AAT deficiency.
                
Lung-Related Tests
                
If you have a lung disease related to AAT deficiency, your doctor may recommend lung function tests and high-resolution computed tomography (to-MOG-rah-fee) scanning, also called CT scanning.
                
Lung function tests measure how much air you can breathe in and out, how fast you can breathe air out, and how well your lungs deliver oxygen to your blood. These tests may show how severe your lung disease is and how well treatment is working.
                
High-resolution CT scanning uses x rays to create detailed pictures of parts of the body. A CT scan can show whether you have emphysema or another lung disease and how severe it is.
Alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency has no cure, but its related lung diseases have many treatments. Most of these treatments are the same as the ones used for a lung disease called COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease).
                
If you have symptoms related to AAT deficiency, your doctor may recommend:
                
Medicines called inhaled bronchodilators (brong-ko-di-LA-tors) and inhaled steroids. These medicines help open your airways and make breathing easier. They also are used to treat asthma and COPD.
                
Flu and pneumococcal (noo-mo-KOK-al) vaccines to protect you from illnesses that could make your condition worse. Prompt treatment of lung infections also can help protect your lungs.
                
Pulmonary rehabilitation (rehab). Rehab involves treatment by a team of experts at a special clinic. In rehab, you'll learn how to manage your condition and function at your best.
                
Extra oxygen, if needed.
                
A lung transplant. A lung transplant may be an option if you have severe breathing problems. If you have a good chance of surviving the transplant surgery, you may be a candidate for it.
                
Augmentation (og-men-TA-shun) therapy is a treatment used only for people who have AAT-related lung diseases. This therapy involves getting infusions of the AAT protein. The infusions raise the level of the protein in your blood and lungs.
                
Not enough research has been done to show how well this therapy works. However, some research suggests that this therapy may slow the development of AAT deficiency in people who don't have severe disease.
                
People who have AAT deficiency and develop related liver or skin diseases will be referred to doctors who treat those diseases.
                
Future Treatments
                
Researchers are working on possible treatments that will target the faulty AAT genes and replace them with healthy genes. These treatments are in the early stages of development.
                
Researchers also are studying therapies that will help misshapen AAT proteins move from the liver into the bloodstream. They're also studying a type of augmentation therapy in which the AAT protein is inhaled instead of injected into a vein.
                
If you're interested in new treatments, ask your doctor about ongoing clinical trials for AAT deficiency.
You can't prevent alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency because the condition is inherited (passed from parents to children through genes).
                
If you inherit two faulty AAT genes, you'll have AAT deficiency. Even so, you may never develop one of the diseases related to the condition.
                
You can take steps to prevent or delay lung diseases related to AAT deficiency. One important step is to quit smoking. If you don't smoke, don't start.
                
Talk with your doctor about programs and products that can help you quit smoking. If you have trouble quitting smoking on your own, consider joining a support group. Many hospitals, workplaces, and community groups offer classes to help people quit smoking.
                
For more information about how to quit smoking, go to the Health Topics Smoking and Your Heart article and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute's "Your Guide to a Healthy Heart." Although these resources focus on heart health, they include basic information about how to quit smoking.
                
Also, try to avoid secondhand smoke and places with dust, fumes, or other toxic substances that you may inhale.
                
Check your living and working spaces for things that may irritate your lungs. Examples include flower and tree pollen, ash, allergens, air pollution, wood burning stoves, paint fumes, and fumes from cleaning products and other household items.
                
If you have a lung disease related to AAT deficiency, ask your doctor whether you might benefit from augmentation therapy. This is a treatment in which you receive infusions of AAT protein.
                
Augmentation therapy raises the level of AAT protein in your blood and lungs. (For more information, go to "How Is Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency Treated?")
Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency is an inherited disorder that may cause lung disease and liver disease. The signs and symptoms of the condition and the age at which they appear vary among individuals.  People with alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency usually develop the first signs and symptoms of lung disease between ages 20 and 50. The earliest symptoms are shortness of breath following mild activity, reduced ability to exercise, and wheezing. Other signs and symptoms can include unintentional weight loss, recurring respiratory infections, fatigue, and rapid heartbeat upon standing. Affected individuals often develop emphysema, which is a lung disease caused by damage to the small air sacs in the lungs (alveoli). Characteristic features of emphysema include difficulty breathing, a hacking cough, and a barrel-shaped chest. Smoking or exposure to tobacco smoke accelerates the appearance of emphysema symptoms and damage to the lungs.  About 10 percent of infants with alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency develop liver disease, which often causes yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice). Approximately 15 percent of adults with alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency develop liver damage (cirrhosis) due to the formation of scar tissue in the liver. Signs of cirrhosis include a swollen abdomen, swollen feet or legs, and jaundice. Individuals with alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency are also at risk of developing a type of liver cancer called hepatocellular carcinoma.  In rare cases, people with alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency develop a skin condition called panniculitis, which is characterized by hardened skin with painful lumps or patches. Panniculitis varies in severity and can occur at any age.
Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency occurs worldwide, but its prevalence varies by population. This disorder affects about 1 in 1,500 to 3,500 individuals with European ancestry. It is uncommon in people of Asian descent. Many individuals with alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency are likely undiagnosed, particularly people with a lung condition called chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). COPD can be caused by alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency; however, the alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency is often never diagnosed. Some people with alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency are misdiagnosed with asthma.
Mutations in the SERPINA1 gene cause alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called alpha-1 antitrypsin, which protects the body from a powerful enzyme called neutrophil elastase. Neutrophil elastase is released from white blood cells to fight infection, but it can attack normal tissues (especially the lungs) if not tightly controlled by alpha-1 antitrypsin.  Mutations in the SERPINA1 gene can lead to a shortage (deficiency) of alpha-1 antitrypsin or an abnormal form of the protein that cannot control neutrophil elastase. Without enough functional alpha-1 antitrypsin, neutrophil elastase destroys alveoli and causes lung disease. Abnormal alpha-1 antitrypsin can also accumulate in the liver and damage this organ.  Environmental factors, such as exposure to tobacco smoke, chemicals, and dust, likely impact the severity of alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal codominant pattern. Codominance means that two different versions of the gene may be active (expressed), and both versions contribute to the genetic trait.  The most common version (allele) of the SERPINA1 gene, called M, produces normal levels of alpha-1 antitrypsin. Most people in the general population have two copies of the M allele (MM) in each cell. Other versions of the SERPINA1 gene lead to reduced levels of alpha-1 antitrypsin. For example, the S allele produces moderately low levels of this protein, and the Z allele produces very little alpha-1 antitrypsin. Individuals with two copies of the Z allele (ZZ) in each cell are likely to have alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency. Those with the SZ combination have an increased risk of developing lung diseases (such as emphysema), particularly if they smoke.  Worldwide, it is estimated that 161 million people have one copy of the S or Z allele and one copy of the M allele in each cell (MS or MZ). Individuals with an MS (or SS) combination usually produce enough alpha-1 antitrypsin to protect the lungs. People with MZ alleles, however, have a slightly increased risk of impaired lung or liver function.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency:  - Alpha-1 Foundation: Testing for Alpha-1  - Cleveland Clinic Respiratory Institute  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency  - GeneFacts: Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency: Diagnosis  - GeneFacts: Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency: Management  - Genetic Testing Registry: Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Pulmonary function tests  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Wheezing   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care