Complex II deficiency is a mitochondrial disease. Mitochondria are specialized compartments in cells that create more than 90% of the energy needed by the body. In mitochondrial diseases, the mitochondria don't work correctly resulting in less energy in the cell, cell injury and cell death. The signs and symptoms of mitochondrial complex II deficiency can vary greatly from severe life-threatening symptoms in infancy to muscle disease beginning in adulthood. Complex II deficiency can be caused by mutations in the SDHA, SDHB, SDHD, or SDHAF1 genes. In many cases the underlying gene mutations cannot be identified. Complex II deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion. Complex II deficiency gene mutation carriers may be at an increased risk for certain cancers.
 Many genes must work together to ensure that the enzyme, complex II (succinate dehydrogenase), can perform its job normally in the body. Changes in the SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD, SDHAF1, and SDHAF2 genes can all potentially cause complex II deficiency. Complex II deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion. This means that a person must inherit a gene mutation from both their mother and father in order to develop complex II deficiency. People who have a single mutation are called carriers. Carriers of complex II deficiency may be at an increased risk for certain health problems, including for paragangliomas and/or pheochromocytomas.[8676]
 Treatment options for complex II deficiency may be similar to those for other mitochondrial disorders in general.[8677] The United Mitochondrial Disease Foundation (UMDF) provides detailed information on treatment through their Web site at: http://www.umdf.org/site/pp.aspx?c=8qKOJ0MvF7LUG&b=7934635 We strongly recommend that you discuss this information with a healthcare provider.
Cytochrome C oxidase deficiency (COX deficiency) is a condition that can affect several parts of the body including the skeletal muscles, heart, brain and liver. The range and severity of signs and symptoms can vary widely among affected individuals (even within the same family) and depend on the form of the condition present. Features in mildly affected individuals may include muscle weakness and hypotonia; in more severely affected individuals, brain dysfunction; heart problems; an enlarged liver; lactic acidosis; and/or a specific group of features known as Leigh syndrome may also be present. COX deficiency is caused by mutations in any of at least 14 genes; the inheritance pattern depends on the gene involved. The condition is frequently fatal in childhood, but mildly affected individuals may survive into adolescence or adulthood.
 There is currently no cure for cytochrome C oxidase (COX) deficiency. Management of all forms of COX deficiency generally focuses on the specific symptoms present in the affected individual and is largely supportive. The goals of treatment are to improve symptoms and slow progression of the disease; the effectiveness of treatment varies with each individual. Treatment generally does not reverse any damage that has already occurred. Prognosis varies depending on the form of COX deficiency present. Individuals with benign infantile mitochondrial myopathy may experience spontaneous recovery (although early diagnosis and intensive treatment is still needed until this point), while there may be rapid demise in individuals with Leigh syndrome. It is often recommended that individuals with mitochondrial disorders such as COX deficiency avoid fasting. Dehydration due to vomiting or illness may be treated with intravenous fluid if the individual is not able to take fluids orally. Seizures are typically controlled with anticonvulsants. Some affected individuals may benefit from physical, occupational, and speech therapies that are specifically tailored to their needs. Dietary supplements including certain vitamins and cofactors have shown varying degrees of benefit in individual cases. Individuals interested in specific management recommendations for themselves or relatives should speak with their healthcare providers.
Mitochondrial complex III deficiency is a genetic condition that can affect several parts of the body, including the brain, kidneys, liver, heart, and the muscles used for movement (skeletal muscles). Signs and symptoms of mitochondrial complex III deficiency usually begin in infancy but can appear later.  The severity of mitochondrial complex III deficiency varies widely among affected individuals. People who are mildly affected tend to have muscle weakness (myopathy) and extreme tiredness (fatigue), particularly during exercise (exercise intolerance). More severely affected individuals have problems with multiple body systems, such as liver disease that can lead to liver failure, kidney abnormalities (tubulopathy), and brain dysfunction (encephalopathy). Encephalopathy can cause delayed development of mental and motor skills (psychomotor delay), movement problems, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and difficulty with communication. Some affected individuals have a form of heart disease called cardiomyopathy, which can lead to heart failure. Most people with mitochondrial complex III deficiency have a buildup of a chemical called lactic acid in the body (lactic acidosis). Some affected individuals also have buildup of molecules called ketones (ketoacidosis) or high blood sugar levels (hyperglycemia). Abnormally high levels of these chemicals in the body can be life-threatening.  Mitochondrial complex III deficiency can be fatal in childhood, although individuals with mild signs and symptoms can survive into adolescence or adulthood.
The prevalence of mitochondrial complex III deficiency is unknown, although the condition is thought to be rare.
Mitochondrial complex III deficiency is usually inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.  In some cases caused by mutations in the MT-CYB gene, the condition is not inherited; it is caused by new mutations in the gene that occur in people with no history of the condition in their family. Other cases caused by mutations in the MT-CYB gene are inherited in a mitochondrial pattern, which is also known as maternal inheritance. This pattern of inheritance applies to genes contained in mtDNA. Because egg cells, but not sperm cells, contribute mitochondria to the developing embryo, children can only inherit disorders resulting from mtDNA mutations from their mother. These disorders can appear in every generation of a family and can affect both males and females, but fathers do not pass traits associated with changes in mtDNA to their children.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of mitochondrial complex III deficiency:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Mitochondrial Disorders Overview  - Genetic Testing Registry: MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY, NUCLEAR TYPE 6  - Genetic Testing Registry: MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY, NUCLEAR TYPE 7  - Genetic Testing Registry: MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY, NUCLEAR TYPE 8  - Genetic Testing Registry: Mitochondrial complex III deficiency  - Genetic Testing Registry: Mitochondrial complex III deficiency, nuclear type 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Mitochondrial complex III deficiency, nuclear type 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Mitochondrial complex III deficiency, nuclear type 4  - Genetic Testing Registry: Mitochondrial complex III deficiency, nuclear type 5   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care