Cerebellar degeneration refers to the deterioration of neurons in the cerebellum (the area of the brain that controls muscle coordination and balance). Conditions that cause cerebellar degeneration may also affect other areas of the central nervous system, such as the spinal cord, the cerebral cortex, and the brain stem. Signs and symptoms of cerebellar degeneration may include a wide-based, uncoordinated walk; a back and forth tremor in the trunk of the body; uncoordinated movements of the arms and legs; slow and slurred speech; and nystagmus. Cerebellar degeneration can be caused by a variety of factors including inherited gene changes (mutations), chronic alcohol abuse, and paraneoplastic disorders. Treatment for cerebellar degeneration varies depending on the underlying cause.
 Cerebellar degeneration is primarily characterized by a wide-legged, unsteady, lurching walk that is usually accompanied by a back and forth tremor in the trunk of the body. Other signs and symptoms may include slow, unsteady and jerky movement of the arms or legs; slowed and slurred speech; and nystagmus. Although cerebellar disorders usually strike adults in middle age, the age of symptomatic onset varies depending on the underlying cause of the degeneration. Studies have shown that many patients with movement disorders caused by damage to the cerebellum also have psychiatric symptoms. These studies suggest that patients with cerebellar diseases may benefit from screening and treatment of psychiatric disorders.
 Cerebellar degeneration can be caused by a variety of different conditions. Neurological diseases that can lead to cerebellar degeneration include: Acute and hemorrhagic stroke can result in a lack of blood flow or oxygen to the brain, leading to the death of neurons in the cerebellum and other brain structures. Cerebellar cortical atrophy, multisystem atrophy and olivopontocerebellar degeneration are progressive degenerative disorders that affect various parts of the nervous system, including the cerebellum. Spinocerebellar ataxias, including Friedreich ataxia, are caused by inherited changes (mutations) in many different genes and are characterized by cell death in the cerebellum, brain stem, and spinal cord. Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (such as 'Mad Cow Disease' and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease) are associated with inflammation of the brain, particularly in the cerebellum, that is caused by abnormal proteins. Multiple sclerosis occurs when the insulating membrane (myelin) that wraps around and protects nerve cells (including those of the cerebellum) become damaged. Other conditions that can lead to temporary or permanent cerebellar damage include chronic alcohol abuse and paraneoplastic disorders.
 Cerebellar degeneration is associated with a variety of inherited and non-inherited conditions. One example of an inherited form of cerebellar degeneration is spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA), which refers to a group of conditions characterized by degenerative changes of the cerebellum, brain stem, and spinal cord. Depending on the type, SCA can be inherited in an autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-linked manner. Other complex conditions such as multiple sclerosis and multisystem atrophy are also associated with cerebellar degeneration. These conditions are likely caused by the interaction of multiple genetic and environmental factors. Although complex conditions are not passed directly from parent to child, reports of familial forms exist. This suggests that a genetic susceptibility to these conditions can run in families. Many causes of cerebellar degeneration are acquired (non-genetic and non-inherited) including strokes, transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, chronic alcohol abuse and paraneoplastic disorders.
 A diagnosis of cerebellar degeneration is often suspected when concerning signs and symptoms, such as a poorly coordinated gait (walk) and uncoordinated hand/finger movements, are present. For hereditary forms of cerebellar degeneration, genetic testing may be used to confirm the diagnosis. However, this is only an option if the disease-causing gene for that particular condition is known. In cerebellar degeneration caused by acquired (non-genetic and non-inherited) conditions or conditions with an unknown genetic cause, imaging studies such as computed tomography (CT scan) and/or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI scan) may be necessary to establish a diagnosis. A CT scan is an imaging method that uses x-rays to create pictures of cross-sections of the body, while an MRI scan uses powerful magnets and radio waves to create pictures of the brain and surrounding nerve tissues. Both of these imaging methods can be used to identify brain abnormalities found in people with cerebellar degeneration. Is genetic testing available for cerebellar degeneration? Genetic testing is only available for cerebellar degeneration that is caused by an inherited change (mutation) in a disease-causing gene. For example, genetic testing is available for many different genes known to cause spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) which is one cause of inherited cerebellar degeneration. For more information on genetic testing for SCA, please click here. For many conditions known to cause cerebellar ataxia, the genetic cause is unknown or the condition is acquired (non-genetic and non-inherited). Genetic testing is not an option for people with these conditions.
 There is currently no cure for hereditary forms of cerebellar degeneration. In these cases, treatment is usually supportive and based on the signs and symptoms present in each person. For example, a variety of drugs may be used to treat gait abnormalities. Physical therapy can strengthen muscles, while special devices or appliances can assist in walking and other activities of daily life. In acquired (non-genetic and non-inherited) forms of cerebellar degeneration, some signs and symptoms may be reversible with treatment of the underlying cause. For example, paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration may improve after successful treatment of the underlying cancer. For alcoholic/nutritional cerebellar degeneration, symptoms are often relieved with discontinuation of alcohol abuse, a normal diet and dietary supplementation with thiamine and other B vitamins.
Paraneoplastic syndromes are a group of rare disorders that include paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration (PCD). Paraneoplastic syndromes are thought to result from an abnormal immune response to an underlying (and often undetected) malignant tumor. PCD is a rare, non-metastatic complication of cancer. PCD is typically thought to be caused by antibodies generated against tumor cells. Instead of just attacking the cancer cells, the cancer-fighting antibodies also attack normal cells in the cerebellum. PCD occurs most often in individuals with the following cancers: ovarian cancer, cancer of the uterus, breast cancer, small-cell lung cancer, and Hodgkin lymphoma. Symptoms of PCD may include dizziness, loss of coordination, blurred vision, nystagmus, ataxia, and speech difficulties.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Cerebellar hypoplasia tapetoretinal degeneration. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal electroretinogram 90% Abnormality of retinal pigmentation 90% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the cerebellum 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Incoordination 90% Muscular hypotonia 90% Nystagmus 90% Optic atrophy 90% Visual impairment 90% Ataxia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cerebellar hypoplasia - Tremor - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Subacute cerebellar degeneration is the breakdown of the area of the brain that controls muscle coordination and balance (the cerebellum). Less commonly, the area connecting the spinal cord to the brain is involved. Subacute cerebellar degeneration may occur in association with a cancer (paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration) or lack of thiamine (alcoholic or nutritional cerebellar degeneration). Signs and symptoms may include ataxia, speech and swallowing problems, dementia, vision problems, and vertigo.
 Signs and symptoms of subacute cerebellar degeneration, include ataxia, speech and swallowing problems, dementia (in about half of people with this condition), and difficulty walking. People with subacute cerebellar degeneration due to thiamine deficiency may also experience quick involuntary movements of the eyeball (nystagmus), double-vision, dizziness, and paralysis of the eye muscles. In paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration, dizziness, nausea, and vomiting may precede the neurological symptoms. Paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration may occur in association with Lambert Eaton myasthenic syndrome or encephalomyelitis.
 Subacute cerebellar degeneration may occur when the body's immune system attacks healthy tissue, either for unknown reasons or as an abnormal reaction to an underlying cancer. These cases are referred to as paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration. Subacute cerebellar degeneration may also occur due to thiamine deficiency. Causes of thiamin deficiency include alcoholism, recurrent vomiting, gastric surgery, and diets poor in this B vitamin. These cases are referred to as alcoholic/nutritional cerebellar degeneration. For further information pertaining to the neurological effects of severe thiamine deficiency, see the following link to the Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome resource page. http://rarediseases.info.nih.gov/gard/6843/wernicke-korsakoff-syndrome/Resources/1
Cerebellar degeneration is a process in which neurons in the cerebellum - the area of the brain that controls coordination and balance - deteriorate and die. Diseases that cause cerebellar degeneration can also involve other areas of the central nervous system,including the spinal cord, medulla oblongata, cerebral cortex, and brain stem. Cerebellar degeneration may be the result of inherited genetic mutations that alter the normal production of specific proteins that are necessary for the survival of neurons.
                
Associated diseases: Diseases that are specific to the brain, as well as diseases that occur in other parts of the body, can cause neurons to die in the cerebellum. Neurological diseases that feature cerebellar degeneration include:
                
- ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke, when there is lack of blood flow or oxygen to the cerebellum - cerebellar cortical atrophy, multisystem atrophy, and olivopontocerebellar degeneration, progressive degenerative disorders in which cerebellar degeneration is a key feature - Friedreichs ataxia, and other spinocerebellar ataxias, which are caused by inherited genetic mutations that result in ongoing loss of neurons in the cerebellum, brain stem, and spinal cord - transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease) in which abnormal proteins cause inflammation in the brain, including the cerebellum - multiple sclerosis, in which damage to the insulating membrane (myelin) that wraps around and protects nerve cells can involve the cerebellum  Other diseases that can cause cerebellar degeneration include: - chronic alcohol abuse that leads to temporary or permanent cerebellar damage - paraneoplastic disorders, in which a malignancy (cancer) in other parts of the body produces substances that cause immune system cells to attack neurons in the cerebellum  Symptoms of cerebellar degeneration: The most characteristic symptom of cerebellar degeneration is a wide-based, unsteady, lurching walk, often accompanied by a back and forth tremor in the trunk of the body. Other symptoms may include slow, unsteady and jerky movement of the arms or legs, slowed and slurred speech, and nystagmus -- rapid, small movements of the eyes.