Lactate dehydrogenase deficiency is a condition that affects how the body breaks down sugar to use as energy in cells, primarily muscle cells. There are two types of lactate dehydrogenase deficiency: lactate dehydrogenase A deficiency (sometimes called glycogen storage disease XI) and lactate dehydrogenase B deficiency. People with lactate dehydrogenase A deficiency experience fatigue, muscle pain, and cramps during exercise (exercise intolerance). People with lactate dehydrogenase B deficiency typically do not have symptoms. Lactate dehydrogenase A deficiency is caused by mutations in the LDHA gene. Lactate dehydrogenase B deficiency is caused by mutations in the LDHB gene. Both types are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
Lactate dehydrogenase deficiency is a condition that affects how the body breaks down sugar to use as energy in cells, primarily muscle cells.  There are two types of this condition: lactate dehydrogenase-A deficiency (sometimes called glycogen storage disease XI) and lactate dehydrogenase-B deficiency.  People with lactate dehydrogenase-A deficiency experience fatigue, muscle pain, and cramps during exercise (exercise intolerance). In some people with lactate dehydrogenase-A deficiency, high-intensity exercise or other strenuous activity leads to the breakdown of muscle tissue (rhabdomyolysis). The destruction of muscle tissue releases a protein called myoglobin, which is processed by the kidneys and released in the urine (myoglobinuria). Myoglobin causes the urine to be red or brown. This protein can also damage the kidneys, in some cases leading to life-threatening kidney failure. Some people with lactate dehydrogenase-A deficiency develop skin rashes. The severity of the signs and symptoms among individuals with lactate dehydrogenase-A deficiency varies greatly.  People with lactate dehydrogenase-B deficiency typically do not have any signs or symptoms of the condition. They do not have difficulty with physical activity or any specific physical features related to the condition. Affected individuals are usually discovered only when routine blood tests reveal reduced lactate dehydrogenase activity.
Lactate dehydrogenase deficiency is a rare disorder. In Japan, this condition affects 1 in 1 million individuals; the prevalence of lactate dehydrogenase deficiency in other countries is unknown.
Mutations in the LDHA gene cause lactate dehydrogenase-A deficiency, and mutations in the LDHB gene cause lactate dehydrogenase-B deficiency. These genes provide instructions for making the lactate dehydrogenase-A and lactate dehydrogenase-B pieces (subunits) of the lactate dehydrogenase enzyme. This enzyme is found throughout the body and is important for creating energy for cells. There are five different forms of this enzyme, each made up of four protein subunits. Various combinations of the lactate dehydrogenase-A and lactate dehydrogenase-B subunits make up the different forms of the enzyme.  The version of lactate dehydrogenase made of four lactate dehydrogenase-A subunits is found primarily in skeletal muscles, which are muscles used for movement. Skeletal muscles need large amounts of energy during high-intensity physical activity when the body's oxygen intake is not sufficient for the amount of energy required (anaerobic exercise). During anaerobic exercise, the lactate dehydrogenase enzyme is involved in the breakdown of sugar stored in the muscles (in the form of glycogen) to create additional energy. During the final stage of glycogen breakdown, lactate dehydrogenase converts a molecule called pyruvate to a similar molecule called lactate.  Mutations in the LDHA gene result in the production of an abnormal lactate dehydrogenase-A subunit that cannot attach (bind) to other subunits to form the lactate dehydrogenase enzyme. A lack of functional subunit reduces the amount of enzyme that is formed, mostly affecting skeletal muscles. As a result, glycogen is not broken down efficiently, leading to decreased energy in muscle cells. When muscle cells do not get sufficient energy during exercise or strenuous activity, the muscles become weak and muscle tissue can break down, as experienced by people with lactate dehydrogenase-A deficiency.  The version of lactate dehydrogenase made of four lactate dehydrogenase-B subunits is found primarily in heart (cardiac) muscle. In cardiac muscle, lactate dehydrogenase converts lactate to pyruvate, which can participate in other chemical reactions to create energy. LDHB gene mutations lead to the production of an abnormal lactate dehydrogenase-B subunit that cannot form the lactate dehydrogenase enzyme. Even though lactate dehydrogenase activity is decreased in the cardiac muscle of people with lactate dehydrogenase-B deficiency, they do not appear to have any signs or symptoms related to their condition. It is unclear why this type of enzyme deficiency does not cause any health problems.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of lactate dehydrogenase deficiency:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Glycogen storage disease XI  - Genetic Testing Registry: Lactate dehydrogenase B deficiency  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: LDH Isoenzymes  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Lactate Dehydrogenase Test   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD) deficiency is a rare condition that prevents the body from converting certain fats to energy, particularly during periods without food (fasting).  Signs and symptoms of LCHAD deficiency typically appear during infancy or early childhood and can include feeding difficulties, lack of energy (lethargy), low blood sugar (hypoglycemia), weak muscle tone (hypotonia), liver problems, and abnormalities in the light-sensitive tissue at the back of the eye (retina). Later in childhood, people with this condition may experience muscle pain, breakdown of muscle tissue, and a loss of sensation in their arms and legs (peripheral neuropathy). Individuals with LCHAD deficiency are also at risk for serious heart problems, breathing difficulties, coma, and sudden death.  Problems related to LCHAD deficiency can be triggered by periods of fasting or by illnesses such as viral infections. This disorder is sometimes mistaken for Reye syndrome, a severe disorder that may develop in children while they appear to be recovering from viral infections such as chicken pox or flu. Most cases of Reye syndrome are associated with the use of aspirin during these viral infections.
The incidence of LCHAD deficiency is unknown. One estimate, based on a Finnish population, indicates that 1 in 62,000 pregnancies is affected by this disorder. In the United States, the incidence is probably much lower.
Mutations in the HADHA gene cause LCHAD deficiency. The HADHA gene provides instructions for making part of an enzyme complex called mitochondrial trifunctional protein. This enzyme complex functions in mitochondria, the energy-producing centers within cells. As the name suggests, mitochondrial trifunctional protein contains three enzymes that each perform a different function. This enzyme complex is required to break down (metabolize) a group of fats called long-chain fatty acids. Long-chain fatty acids are found in foods such as milk and certain oils. These fatty acids are stored in the body's fat tissues. Fatty acids are a major source of energy for the heart and muscles. During periods of fasting, fatty acids are also an important energy source for the liver and other tissues.  Mutations in the HADHA gene that cause LCHAD deficiency disrupt one of the functions of this enzyme complex. These mutations prevent the normal processing of long-chain fatty acids from food and body fat. As a result, these fatty acids are not converted to energy, which can lead to some features of this disorder, such as lethargy and hypoglycemia. Long-chain fatty acids or partially metabolized fatty acids may also build up and damage the liver, heart, muscles, and retina. This abnormal buildup causes the other signs and symptoms of LCHAD deficiency.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of LCHAD deficiency:  - Baby's First Test  - Genetic Testing Registry: Long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hypoglycemia  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Peripheral Neuropathy   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency is an inherited condition that prevents the body from converting certain fats to energy, particularly during prolonged periods without food (fasting).  Initial signs and symptoms of this disorder typically occur during infancy or early childhood and can include poor appetite, vomiting, diarrhea, and lack of energy (lethargy). Affected individuals can also have muscle weakness (hypotonia), liver problems, low blood sugar (hypoglycemia), and abnormally high levels of insulin (hyperinsulinism). Insulin controls the amount of sugar that moves from the blood into cells for conversion to energy. Individuals with 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency are also at risk for complications such as seizures, life-threatening heart and breathing problems, coma, and sudden death. This condition may explain some cases of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), which is defined as unexplained death in babies younger than 1 year.  Problems related to 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency can be triggered by periods of fasting or by illnesses such as viral infections. This disorder is sometimes mistaken for Reye syndrome, a severe disorder that may develop in children while they appear to be recovering from viral infections such as chicken pox or flu. Most cases of Reye syndrome are associated with the use of aspirin during these viral infections.
The exact incidence of 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency is unknown; it has been reported in only a small number of people worldwide.
Mutations in the HADH gene cause 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency. The HADH gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase.  Normally, through a process called fatty acid oxidation, several enzymes work in a step-wise fashion to break down (metabolize) fats and convert them to energy. The 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase enzyme is required for a step that metabolizes groups of fats called medium-chain fatty acids and short-chain fatty acids.  Mutations in the HADH gene lead to a shortage of 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase. Medium-chain and short-chain fatty acids cannot be metabolized properly without sufficient levels of this enzyme. As a result, these fatty acids are not converted to energy, which can lead to characteristic features of 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, such as lethargy and hypoglycemia. Medium-chain and short-chain fatty acids that are not broken down can build up in tissues and damage the liver, heart, and muscles, causing serious complications.  Conditions that disrupt the metabolism of fatty acids, including 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, are known as fatty acid oxidation disorders.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency:  - Baby's First Test  - Genetic Testing Registry: Deficiency of 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase  - United Mitochondrial Disease Foundation: Treatments & Therapies   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care