Isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (IBD deficiency) is an inborn error of valine (an amino acid) metabolism. The symptoms, which may not develop until later in infancy or childhood, can include failure to thrive, dilated cardiomyopathy, seizures, and anemia. IBD deficiency is caused by mutations in the ACAD8 gene. It is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
 Infants with IBD deficiency usually appear healthy at birth. The signs and symptoms of IBD deficiency may not appear until later in infancy or childhood and can include poor feeding and growth (failure to thrive), a weakened and enlarged heart (dilated cardiomyopathy), seizures, and low numbers of red blood cells (anemia). Another feature of this disorder may be very low blood levels of carnitine (a natural substance that helps convert certain foods into energy). IBD deficiency may be worsened by long periods without food (fasting) or infections that increase the body's demand for energy. Some individuals with gene mutations that can cause IBD deficiency may never experience any signs and symptoms of the disorder. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Anemia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Decreased plasma carnitine - Dilated cardiomyopathy - Muscular hypotonia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 IBD deficiency is caused by mutations in the ACAD8 gene. The ACAD8 gene provides instructions for making an enzyme that plays an essential role in breaking down proteins from the diet. Specifically, the enzyme is responsible for processing valine, an amino acid that is part of many proteins. If a mutation in the ACAD8 gene reduces or eliminates the activity of this enzyme, the body is unable to break down valine properly. As a result, poor growth and reduced energy production may occur.
 IBD deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
 There is no standard treatment protocol for IBD deficiency. Infants diagnosed through newborn screening are encouraged to work with a metabolic disease specialist and a dietician experienced in metabolic disorders. Some treatments may be recommended even if no symptoms have been observed. Treatment may be needed throughout life. The following treatments may be recommended for some babies and children with IBD deficiency.  Children with IBD deficiency may be helped by taking L-carnitine, a safe and natural substance which helps the body's cells make energy and get rid of harmful wastes. L-carnitine may also help to prevent or treat the heart problems and anemia seen in children with IBD deficiency. Children with IBD deficiency are advised to avoid fasting. Going without food for a long time causes the body to use its stores of fat and protein for energy. In some people with IBD deficiency, this may lead to the build up of harmful substances in the blood. Eating frequently (every 4 to 6 hours) may help to avoid these health effects. While most children with IBD deficiency do fine without a change in diet, a low-valine food plan might be necessary. Valine is found in all foods with protein. Foods high in valine, such as dairy products, meat, poultry, fish, eggs, dried beans and legumes, nuts and peanut butter should be limited. There are medical foods such low-protein flours, pastas, rice, and special formulas that are made especially for people with organic acid disorders. Your dietician / physician can advise you on whether you should use these foods to supplement your childs diet.
Isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase (IBD) deficiency is a condition that disrupts the breakdown of certain proteins. Normally, proteins from food are broken down into parts called amino acids. Amino acids can be further processed to provide energy for growth and development. People with IBD deficiency have inadequate levels of an enzyme that helps break down a particular amino acid called valine.  Most people with IBD deficiency are asymptomatic, which means they do not have any signs or symptoms of the condition. A few children with IBD deficiency have developed features such as a weakened and enlarged heart (dilated cardiomyopathy), weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and developmental delay. This condition may also cause low numbers of red blood cells (anemia) and very low blood levels of carnitine, which is a natural substance that helps convert certain foods into energy. The range of signs and symptoms associated with IBD deficiency remains unclear because very few affected individuals have been reported.
IBD deficiency is a rare disorder; approximately 22 cases have been reported in the medical literature.
Mutations in the ACAD8 gene cause IBD deficiency. This gene provides instructions for making the IBD enzyme, which is involved in breaking down valine. ACAD8 gene mutations reduce or eliminate the activity of the IBD enzyme. As a result, valine is not broken down properly. Impaired processing of valine may lead to reduced energy production and the features of IBD deficiency.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency:  - Baby's First Test  - Genetic Testing Registry: Deficiency of isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Dilated Cardiomyopathy   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care