Very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD) deficiency is a condition that prevents the body from converting certain fats to energy, particularly during periods without food (fasting).  Signs and symptoms of VLCAD deficiency typically appear during infancy or early childhood and can include low blood sugar (hypoglycemia), lack of energy (lethargy), and muscle weakness. Affected individuals are also at risk for serious complications such as liver abnormalities and life-threatening heart problems. When symptoms begin in adolescence or adulthood, they tend to be milder and usually do not involve the heart.  Problems related to VLCAD deficiency can be triggered by periods of fasting, illness, and exercise. This disorder is sometimes mistaken for Reye syndrome, a severe disorder that may develop in children while they appear to be recovering from viral infections such as chicken pox or flu. Most cases of Reye syndrome are associated with the use of aspirin during these viral infections.
VLCAD deficiency is estimated to affect 1 in 40,000 to 120,000 people.
Mutations in the ACADVL gene cause VLCAD deficiency. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, which is required to break down (metabolize) a group of fats called very long-chain fatty acids. These fatty acids are found in foods and the body's fat tissues. Fatty acids are a major source of energy for the heart and muscles. During periods of fasting, fatty acids are also an important energy source for the liver and other tissues.  Mutations in the ACADVL gene lead to a shortage (deficiency) of the VLCAD enzyme within cells. Without sufficient amounts of this enzyme, very long-chain fatty acids are not metabolized properly. As a result, these fats are not converted to energy, which can lead to the characteristic signs and symptoms of this disorder such as lethargy and hypoglycemia. Very long-chain fatty acids or partially metabolized fatty acids may also build up in tissues and damage the heart, liver, and muscles. This abnormal buildup causes the other signs and symptoms of VLCAD deficiency.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of VLCAD deficiency:  - Baby's First Test  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Very Long-Chain Acyl-Coenzyme A Dehydrogenase Deficiency  - Genetic Testing Registry: Very long chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Newborn Screening Tests   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (SCAD) deficiency is a condition that prevents the body from converting certain fats into energy, especially during periods without food (fasting).  Signs and symptoms of SCAD deficiency may appear during infancy or early childhood and can include vomiting, low blood sugar (hypoglycemia), a lack of energy (lethargy), poor feeding, and failure to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive). Other features of this disorder may include poor muscle tone (hypotonia), seizures, developmental delay, and a small head size (microcephaly).  The symptoms of SCAD deficiency may be triggered by fasting or illnesses such as viral infections. This disorder is sometimes mistaken for Reye syndrome, a severe condition that may develop in children while they appear to be recovering from viral infections such as chicken pox or flu. Most cases of Reye syndrome are associated with the use of aspirin during these viral infections.  In some people with SCAD deficiency, signs and symptoms do not appear until adulthood. These individuals are more likely to have problems related to muscle weakness and wasting.  The severity of this condition varies widely, even among members of the same family. Some individuals are diagnosed with SCAD deficiency based on laboratory testing but never develop any symptoms of the condition.
This disorder is thought to affect approximately 1 in 35,000 to 50,000 newborns.
Mutations in the ACADS gene cause SCAD deficiency. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, which is required to break down (metabolize) a group of fats called short-chain fatty acids. Fatty acids are a major source of energy for the heart and muscles. During periods of fasting, fatty acids are also an important energy source for the liver and other tissues.  Mutations in the ACADS gene lead to a shortage (deficiency) of the SCAD enzyme within cells. Without sufficient amounts of this enzyme, short-chain fatty acids are not metabolized properly. As a result, these fats are not converted into energy, which can lead to the signs and symptoms of this disorder, such as lethargy, hypoglycemia, and muscle weakness. It remains unclear why some people with SCAD deficiency never develop any symptoms.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of SCAD deficiency:  - Baby's First Test  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Short-Chain Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency  - Genetic Testing Registry: Deficiency of butyryl-CoA dehydrogenase  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Newborn Screening Tests   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care