Dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase (DLD) deficiency is a very rare condition that can vary in age of onset, symptoms and severity. The condition may be characterized by early-onset lactic acidosis and delayed development (most commonly); later-onset neurological dysfunction; or adult-onset isolated liver disease. Signs and symptoms may include lactic acidosis shortly after birth; hypotonia and lethargy in infancy; feeding difficulties; seizures; and various other health issues. Liver problems can range from hepatomegaly to life-threatening liver failure. Symptoms often occur in episodes that may be triggered by illness or other stresses on the body. Many affected infants do not survive the first few years of life; those who survive through early childhood often have growth delay and intellectual disability. Some with onset later in childhood may have neurological dysfunction with normal cognitive development. DLD deficiency is caused by mutations in the DLD gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
 Dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase (DLD) deficiency is caused by changes (mutations) in the DLD gene. This gene gives the body instructions to make an enzyme called dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase (DLD). DLD is one part of 3 different groups of enzymes that work together (enzyme complexes). These enzyme complexes are involved in breaking down amino acids commonly found in protein-rich foods, and in other reactions that help to convert energy from food into a form that our cells can use. Mutations in the DLD gene impair the function of DLD, preventing the 3 enzyme complexes from functioning properly. This causes a build-up of molecules that are normally broken down, which in turn leads to tissue damage, lactic acidosis and other chemical imbalances. The brain is especially sensitive to the buildup of molecules and lack of cellular energy, which is why there are neurological problems associated with DLD deficiency.
How  Dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase (DLD) deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that a person must have a mutation in both copies of the responsible gene in each cell to be affected. The parents of an affected person usually each carry one mutated copy of the gene and are referred to as carriers. Carriers typically do not have any signs or symptoms of the condition. When two carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to be affected, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be a carrier like each of the parents, and a 25% to be unaffected and not be a carrier.
 There are currently no consensus recommendations for the management of dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase (DLD) deficiency. Management can be hard because various metabolic pathways are affected and 3 enzyme complexes are involved. Deficiencies in enzyme pathways vary depending on the specific mutation(s) each affected person has. Unfortunately, the treatments that have been attempted in children with the early-onset neurologic form do not appear to significantly alter the course of the disease. Even with treatment, children often do not survive infancy or have varying degrees of chronic neurologic impairment if they survive the initial episode. Depending on individual enzyme complex deficiencies, treatment may involve certain dietary restrictions or certain diets; use of medical foods; and/or supplementation of specific amino acids or other substances. There is limited data for the chronic management of people with the primarily hepatic (liver-related) form of the disease. Management typically involves supportive therapy during times of acute liver injury or failure, and may include nutritional support; IV glucose for hypoglycemia; correction of metabolic acidosis; correction of coagulopathy; and avoidance of liver-toxic medications. More detailed information about the management of DLD deficiency can be viewed on the GeneReviews Web site. GeneReviews is intended for use by genetics professionals. Those not familiar with the principles discussed on the GeneReviews Web site are encouraged to speak with a genetics professional or other healthcare provider regarding information of interest.
Dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase deficiency is a severe condition that can affect several body systems. Signs and symptoms of this condition usually appear shortly after birth, and they can vary widely among affected individuals.  A common feature of dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase deficiency is a potentially life-threatening buildup of lactic acid in tissues (lactic acidosis), which can cause nausea, vomiting, severe breathing problems, and an abnormal heartbeat. Neurological problems are also common in this condition; the first symptoms in affected infants are often decreased muscle tone (hypotonia) and extreme tiredness (lethargy). As the problems worsen, affected infants can have difficulty feeding, decreased alertness, and seizures. Liver problems can also occur in dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase deficiency, ranging from an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly) to life-threatening liver failure. In some affected people, liver disease, which can begin anytime from infancy to adulthood, is the primary symptom. The liver problems are usually associated with recurrent vomiting and abdominal pain. Rarely, people with dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase deficiency experience weakness of the muscles used for movement (skeletal muscles), particularly during exercise; droopy eyelids; or a weakened heart muscle (cardiomyopathy). Other features of this condition include excess ammonia in the blood (hyperammonemia), a buildup of molecules called ketones in the body (ketoacidosis), or low blood sugar levels (hypoglycemia).  Typically, the signs and symptoms of dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase deficiency occur in episodes that may be triggered by fever, injury, or other stresses on the body. Affected individuals are usually symptom-free between episodes. Many infants with this condition do not survive the first few years of life because of the severity of these episodes. Affected individuals who survive past early childhood often have delayed growth and neurological problems, including intellectual disability, muscle stiffness (spasticity), difficulty coordinating movements (ataxia), and seizures.
Dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase deficiency occurs in an estimated 1 in 35,000 to 48,000 individuals of Ashkenazi Jewish descent. This population typically has liver disease as the primary symptom. In other populations, the prevalence of dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase deficiency is unknown, but the condition is likely rare.
Mutations in the DLD gene cause dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase deficiency. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase (DLD). DLD is one component of three different groups of enzymes that work together (enzyme complexes): branched-chain alpha-keto acid dehydrogenase (BCKD), pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH), and alpha ()-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (KGDH). The BCKD enzyme complex is involved in the breakdown of three protein building blocks (amino acids) commonly found in protein-rich foods: leucine, isoleucine, and valine. Breakdown of these amino acids produces molecules that can be used for energy. The PDH and KGDH enzyme complexes are involved in other reactions in the pathways that convert the energy from food into a form that cells can use.  Mutations in the DLD gene impair the function of the DLD enzyme, which prevents the three enzyme complexes from functioning properly. As a result, molecules that are normally broken down and their byproducts build up in the body, damaging tissues and leading to lactic acidosis and other chemical imbalances. In addition, the production of cellular energy is diminished. The brain is especially affected by the buildup of molecules and the lack of cellular energy, resulting in the neurological problems associated with dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase deficiency. Liver problems are likely also related to decreased energy production in cells. The degree of impairment of each complex contributes to the variability in the features of this condition.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase deficiency:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Dihydrolipoamide Dehydrogenase Deficiency  - Genetic Testing Registry: Maple syrup urine disease, type 3   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care