Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP) is a neurological disorder that causes progressive weakness and impaired sensory function in the legs and arms. Symptoms often include tingling or numbness (first in the toes and fingers); weakness of the arms and legs; loss of deep tendon reflexes; fatigue; and abnormal sensations. CIDP is thought to be caused by an abnormal immune response in which the immune system mistakenly attacks and damages the myelin sheath (the covering that protects nerve fibers) of the peripheral nerves. CIDP is closely related to Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS) and is considered the "chronic counterpart" of GBS. Treatment may include corticosteroids, immunosuppressant drugs, plasma exchange, physiotherapy, and/or intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Acute demyelinating polyneuropathy - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
exact underlying cause of CIDP is unknown, but there is evidence to support that it is related to the immune system and may have multiple triggers. It is thought to be caused by an abnormal immune response in which the immune system mistakenly attacks and damages the myelin sheath (the covering that protects nerve fibers) of the peripheral nerves. However, no specific provoking antigens or other predisposing factors for CIDP have been identified. In several case reports, treatment with tumor necrosis factor-alpha inhibitors has been associated with the subsequent development of chronic demyelinating neuropathies.
is not known to be inherited and is considered an acquired disorder. No clear genetic predisposition or other predisposing factors for CIDP have been identified.
 The standard therapies for CIDP appear to be equally effective and include: intravenous immune globulin (IVIG) - adds large numbers of antibodies to the blood plasma to reduce the effect of the antibodies that are causing the problem glucocorticoids - help reduce inflammation and relieve symptoms plasma exchange - remove antibodies from the blood The treatment choice is influenced by the preference of the affected person, side effects, treatment cost, duration, ease of administration, and availability. Advantages and disadvantages of standard therapies may include the following: IVIG and plasma exchange may lead to a more rapid improvement in CIDP than glucocorticoid therapy, but are less likely than glucocorticoids to produce a remission IVIG is expensive, and its supply is sometimes limited Glucocorticoids are inexpensive, but chronic use is limited by common and important side effects Plasma exchange is expensive, invasive, and available only at specialized centers Other medications that suppress the immune system (immunosuppressants) may also be used. Physiotherapy may improve muscle strength, function and mobility.
Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP) is a neurological disorder characterized by progressive weakness and impaired sensory function in the legs and arms. The disorder, which is sometimes called chronic relapsing polyneuropathy, is caused by damage to the myelin sheath (the fatty covering that wraps around and protects nerve fibers) of the peripheral nerves. Although it can occur at any age and in both genders, CIDP is more common in young adults, and in men more so than women. It often presents with symptoms that include tingling or numbness (beginning in the toes and fingers), weakness of the arms and legs, loss of deep tendon reflexes (areflexia), fatigue, and abnormal sensations. CIDP is closely related to Guillain-Barre syndrome and it is considered the chronic counterpart of that acute disease.
Treatment for CIDP includes corticosteroids such as prednisone, which may be prescribed alone or in combination with immunosuppressant drugs. Plasmapheresis (plasma exchange) and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) therapy are effective. IVIg may be used even as a first-line therapy. Physiotherapy may improve muscle strength, function and mobility, and minimize the shrinkage of muscles and tendons and distortions of the joints.
The course of CIDP varies widely among individuals. Some may have a bout of CIDP followed by spontaneous recovery, while others may have many bouts with partial recovery in between relapses. The disease is a treatable cause of acquired neuropathy and initiation of early treatment to prevent loss of nerve axons is recommended. However, some individuals are left with some residual numbness or weakness.
The NINDS supports a broad program of research on disorders of the nervous system, including CIDP. Much of this research is aimed at increasing the understanding of these disorders and finding ways to prevent, treat, and cure them.