Depression is more than just feeling blue or sad. It is an illness. When you have depression, it interferes with daily life and normal functioning, and causes pain for both you and those who care about you.
The risk factors for depression are family history, life experiences, and environment. If you have depression, you may have experienced it when you were younger, and may have a family history of the illness. You may also be going through difficult life events, such as physical or psychological trauma, losing a loved one, a difficult relationship with a family member or friend, or financial troubles. Any of these stressful experiences can lead to depression. For older adults who experience depression for the first time later in life, other factors may be at play. Depression may be related to changes that occur in the brain and body as a person ages. For example, some older adults who are at risk for illnesses such as heart disease or stroke may have hardening and inflammation of the blood vessels, and blood may not be able to flow normally to the body's organs, including the brain. Over time, this blood vessel disease and restricted blood flow can damage nearby brain tissue and harm the nerve connections that help different parts of the brain communicate with each other. If this happens, an older adult with no family history of depression may develop what some doctors call "vascular depression." Older adults may also experience depression as a result of brain changes caused by illnesses such as Alzheimers disease or Parkinsons disease. This type of depression can appear in the early stages of these diseases, before many symptoms appear.
Symptoms of depression often vary depending upon the person. Common symptoms include - feeling nervous or emotionally empty  - tiredness or a "slowed down" feeling  - feeling guilty or worthless  - restlessness and irritability  - feeling like life is not worth living  - sleep problems such as insomnia, oversleeping or wakefulness in the middle of the night   - eating more or less than usual, usually with unplanned weight gain or loss  - having persistent headaches, stomach-aches or other chronic pain that does not go away when treated  - loss of interest in once pleasurable activities  - frequent crying  - difficulty focusing, remembering or making decisions  - thoughts of death or suicide. feeling nervous or emotionally empty tiredness or a "slowed down" feeling feeling guilty or worthless restlessness and irritability feeling like life is not worth living sleep problems such as insomnia, oversleeping or wakefulness in the middle of the night eating more or less than usual, usually with unplanned weight gain or loss having persistent headaches, stomach-aches or other chronic pain that does not go away when treated loss of interest in once pleasurable activities frequent crying difficulty focusing, remembering or making decisions thoughts of death or suicide.
Medications called antidepressants work to normalize brain chemicals called neurotransmitters, notably serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine. Scientists studying depression have found that these chemicals, and possibly others, are involved in regulating mood, but they are unsure of exactly how they work.  Newer Antidepressants. The newest and most popular types of antidepressant medications are called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). They include fluoxetine (Prozac), citalopram (Celexa) and several others. Similar to SSRIs are serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) and include venlafaxine (Effexor) and duloxetine (Cymbalta). Another newer antidepressant bupropion (Wellbutrin) is neither an SSRI nor an SNRI but is popular as well.  Older Antidepressants.  Older antidepressants, called tricyclics and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), are still used sometimes, too. However, these older antidepressants are not as popular as the newer ones because they tend to have more side effects. However, medications affect everyone differently so talk with your doctor to decide which type is best for you.  Practical Considerations. People taking MAOIs must follow strict food and medicine restrictions to avoid potentially serious interactions. If you take an MAOI, your doctor should give you a complete list of foods, medicines, and substances to avoid. MAOIs can also react with SSRIs to produce a serious condition called "serotonin syndrome," which can cause confusion, hallucinations, increased sweating, muscle stiffness, seizures, changes in blood pressure or heart rhythm, and other potentially life threatening conditions. MAOIs should not be taken with SSRIs. Caution is required when combining any serotonergic medication (not just MAOIs) with SSRIs. For example, in 2006 the FDA issued specific warnings against using triptans that are commonly-prescribed to treat migraine headaches together with SSRIs or SNRIs. Using these medications together can cause serotonin syndrome.
Many women have the baby blues after childbirth. If you have the baby blues, you may have mood swings, feel sad, anxious or overwhelmed, have crying spells, lose your appetite, or have trouble sleeping. The baby blues most often go away within a few days or a week. The symptoms are not severe and do not need treatment.    The symptoms of postpartum depression last longer and are more severe. You may also feel hopeless and worthless, and lose interest in the baby. You may have thoughts of hurting yourself or the baby. Very rarely, new mothers develop something even more serious. They may have hallucinations or try to hurt themselves or the baby. They need to get treatment right away, often in the hospital.    Postpartum depression can begin anytime within the first year after childbirth. The cause is not known. Hormonal and physical changes after birth and the stress of caring for a new baby may play a role. Women who have had depression are at higher risk.    If you think you have postpartum depression, tell your health care provider. Medicines, including antidepressants and talk therapy can help you get well.    Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health