Focal dermal hypoplasia is a genetic disorder that primarily affects the skin, skeleton, eyes, and face. The skin abnormalities are present from birth and can include streaks of very thin skin (dermal hypoplasia), cutis aplasia, and telangiectases. They also may abnormalities in the nails, hands, and feet. Some of the eye findings present may include small eyes (microphthalmia), absent or severely underdeveloped eyes (anophthalmia), and problems with the tear ducts. People with focal dermal hypoplasia may also have distinctive facial features such as a pointed chin, small ears, notched nostrils, and a slight difference in the size and shape of the right and left sides of the face (facial asymmetry). Most individuals with this condition are female. Males usually have milder signs and symptoms than females. Although intelligence is typically unaffected, some individuals have intellectual disability. This condition is caused by mutations in the PORCN gene and is inherited in an X-linked dominant manner. Most cases of focal dermal hypoplasia in females result from new mutations in the PORCN gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. When focal dermal hypoplasia occurs in males, it always results from a new mutation in this gene that is not inherited. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in the person; however, care usually involves a team of specialists, including dermatologists, otolaryngologist, physical/occupational therapists, and hand surgeons.
 Focal dermal hypoplasia is caused by mutations in the PORCN gene and is inherited in an X-linked dominant manner. Many cases of focal dermal hypoplasia result from a new mutation and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family For a woman affected with focal dermal hypoplasia, the theoretical risk of passing the mutation to each of her offspring is 50%; however, many males with this condition do not survive. In addition, there are cases in which a woman may have the focal dermal hypoplasia mutation in some but not all of her egg cells, a condition known as germline mosaicism. In this case the risk of passing along the mutation may be as high as 50% depending on the level of mosaicism. Males with focal dermal hypoplasia typically have the mutation in some but not all of their cells. The risk that a male with FDH will pass the condition on to his daughters may be as high as 100%; men do not pass this condition on to their sons. We recommend discussing specific concerns with a genetics professional, who can help you understand how this condition might be inherited in your family. Click on the following link for resources for finding a genetics professional.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Focal facial dermal dysplasia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal facial shape 90% Abnormality of the eye 90% Abnormality of the musculature 90% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the skin 90% Atypical scarring of skin 90% Irregular hyperpigmentation 90% Abnormality of the eyebrow 50% Abnormality of the mouth 50% Depressed nasal bridge 50% Palpebral edema 50% Pointed chin 50% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Decreased subcutaneous fat - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Focal dermal hypoplasia appears to be a rare condition, although its exact prevalence is unknown.
Mutations in the PORCN gene cause focal dermal hypoplasia. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is responsible for modifying other proteins, called Wnt proteins. Wnt proteins participate in chemical signaling pathways in the body that regulate development of the skin, bones, and other structures before birth.  Mutations in the PORCN gene appear to prevent the production of any functional PORCN protein. Researchers believe Wnt proteins cannot be released from the cell without the PORCN protein. When Wnt proteins are unable to leave the cell, they cannot participate in the chemical signaling pathways that are critical for normal development. The various signs and symptoms of focal dermal hypoplasia are likely due to abnormal Wnt signaling during early development.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of focal dermal hypoplasia:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Focal Dermal Hypoplasia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Focal dermal hypoplasia  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Ectodermal dysplasia  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Omphalocele   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care