Diabetes insipidus (DI) causes frequent urination. You become extremely thirsty, so you drink. Then you urinate. This cycle can keep you from sleeping or even make you wet the bed. Your body produces lots of urine that is almost all water.    DI is different from diabetes mellitus (DM), which involves insulin problems and high blood sugar. The symptoms can be similar. However, DI is related to how your kidneys handle fluids. It's much less common than DM. Urine and blood tests can show which one you have.    Usually, DI is caused by a problem with your pituitary gland or your kidneys. Treatment depends on the cause of the problem. Medicines can often help.    NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
Neurogenic diabetes insipidus is a disease that causes frequent urination. This type of diabetes insipidus results from damage to the pituitary gland, which disrupts the normal storage and release of antidiuretic hormone (ADH). When this hormone reaches the kidneys, it directs them to make less urine. Damage to the pituitary gland can be caused by different diseases as well as by head injuries, neurosurgery, or genetic disorders. To treat the ADH deficiency that results from any kind of damage to the pituitary, a synthetic hormone called desmopressin can be taken by an injection, a nasal spray, or a pill.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Neurogenic diabetes insipidus. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal renal physiology 90% Dehydration 90% Diabetes insipidus 90% Weight loss 90% Abnormality of temperature regulation 50% Behavioral abnormality 50% Migraine 50% Reduced consciousness/confusion 50% Diarrhea 7.5% Hypernatremia 7.5% Hyponatremia 7.5% Nausea and vomiting 7.5% Seizures 7.5% Abnormality of metabolism/homeostasis - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Gliosis - Hypertelorism - Long philtrum - Osteopenia - Short nose - Wide nose - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Diabetes insipidus nephrogenic mental retardation and intracerebral calcification. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of metabolism/homeostasis 90% Abnormality of the antihelix 90% Carious teeth 90% Cerebral calcification 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Hypoplasia of the zygomatic bone 90% Increased number of teeth 90% Limitation of joint mobility 90% Short stature 90% Abnormality of the genital system 50% Conductive hearing impairment 50% Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is a disorder in which a defect in the small tubes (tubules) in the kidneys causes a person to pass a large amount of urine. Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus occurs when the kidney tubules, which allow water to be removed from the body or reabsorbed, do not respond to a chemical in the body called antidiuretic hormone (ADH) or vasopressin. ADH normally tells the kidneys to make the urine more concentrated. As a result of the defect, the kidneys release an excessive amount of water into the urine, producing a large quantity of very dilute urine. Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus can be either acquired or hereditary. The acquired form is brought on by certain drugs and chronic diseases and can occur at any time during life. The hereditary form is caused by genetic mutations, and its signs and symptoms usually become apparent within the first few months of life.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Constipation - Diabetes insipidus - Failure to thrive - Feeding difficulties in infancy - Hypernatremia - Hypertonic dehydration - Intellectual disability - Irritability - Megacystis - Neonatal onset - Polydipsia - Polyuria - Seizures - Short stature - Unexplained fevers - Vomiting - X-linked recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus can be either acquired or hereditary. The acquired form can result from chronic kidney disease, certain medications (such as lithium), low levels of potassium in the blood (hypokalemia), high levels of calcium in the blood (hypercalcemia), or an obstruction of the urinary tract. Acquired nephrogenic diabetes insipidus can occur at any time during life. The hereditary form of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is caused by genetic mutations, and its signs and symptoms usually become apparent within the first few months of life.
How  When nephrogenic diabetes insipidus results from mutations in the AVPR2 gene, the condition has an X-linked recessive pattern of inheritance. The AVPR2 gene is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation usually has to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. However, some females who carry a single mutated copy of the AVPR2 gene have features of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, including polyuria and polydipsia. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
 Yes. GeneTests lists laboratories offering clinical genetic testing for both X-linked and autosomal types of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. Clinical genetic tests are ordered to help diagnose a person or family and to aid in decisions regarding medical care or reproductive issues. Talk to your health care provider or a genetic professional to learn more about your testing options.
 Management is usually best accomplished by a team of physicians and other healthcare professionals. The team may include a nutritionist, a pediatric (or adult) nephrologist or endocrinologist, and a clinical geneticist. The basis of management involves free access to drinking water and toilet facilities. Polyuria and polydipsia can be reduced up to 50% without disrupting appropriate levels of sodium in the blood through the use of thiazide diuretics hydrochlorothiazide, chlorothiazide) and/or other diuretics (i.e., potassium-sparing diuretic amiloride), dietary restriction of sodium, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as indomethacin, which can potentially improve the ability of the body to concentrate urine and reduce urine output.
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is a disorder of water balance. The body normally balances fluid intake with the excretion of fluid in urine. However, people with nephrogenic diabetes insipidus produce too much urine (polyuria), which causes them to be excessively thirsty (polydipsia). Affected individuals can quickly become dehydrated if they do not drink enough water, especially in hot weather or when they are sick.  Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus can be either acquired or hereditary. The acquired form is brought on by certain drugs and chronic diseases and can occur at any time during life. The hereditary form is caused by genetic mutations, and its signs and symptoms usually become apparent within the first few months of life.  Infants with hereditary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus may eat poorly and fail to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive). They may also be irritable and experience fevers, diarrhea, and vomiting. Recurrent episodes of dehydration can lead to slow growth and delayed development. If the condition is not well-managed, over time it can damage the bladder and kidneys leading to pain, infections, and kidney failure. With appropriate treatment, affected individuals usually have few complications and a normal lifespan.  Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus should not be confused with diabetes mellitus, which is much more common. Diabetes mellitus is characterized by high blood sugar levels resulting from a shortage of the hormone insulin or an insensitivity to this hormone. Although nephrogenic diabetes insipidus and diabetes mellitus have some features in common, they are separate disorders with different causes.
The prevalence of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is unknown, although the condition is thought to be rare. The acquired form occurs more frequently than the hereditary form.
The hereditary form of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus can be caused by mutations in at least two genes. About 90 percent of all cases of hereditary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus result from mutations in the AVPR2 gene. Most of the remaining 10 percent of cases are caused by mutations in the AQP2 gene. Both of these genes provide instructions for making proteins that help determine how much water is excreted in urine.  The acquired form of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus can result from chronic kidney disease, certain medications (such as lithium), low levels of potassium in the blood (hypokalemia), high levels of calcium in the blood (hypercalcemia), or an obstruction of the urinary tract.  The kidneys filter the blood to remove waste and excess fluid, which are stored in the bladder as urine. The balance between fluid intake and urine excretion is controlled by a hormone called vasopressin or antidiuretic hormone (ADH). ADH directs the kidneys to concentrate urine by reabsorbing some of the water into the bloodstream. Normally, when a person's fluid intake is low or when a lot of fluid is lost (for example, through sweating), increased levels of ADH in the blood tell the kidneys to make less urine. When fluid intake is adequate, lower levels of ADH tell the kidneys to make more urine.  Mutations in the AVPR2 or AQP2 genes prevent the kidneys from responding to signals from ADH. Chronic kidney disease, certain drugs, and other factors can also impair the kidneys' ability to respond to this hormone. As a result, the kidneys do not reabsorb water as they should, and the body makes excessive amounts of urine. These problems with water balance are characteristic of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
When nephrogenic diabetes insipidus results from mutations in the AVPR2 gene, the condition has an X-linked recessive pattern of inheritance. The AVPR2 gene is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation usually has to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. However, some females who carry a single mutated copy of the AVPR2 gene have features of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, including polyuria and polydipsia. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.  When nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is caused by mutations in the AQP2 gene, it can have either an autosomal recessive or, less commonly, an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. In autosomal recessive inheritance, both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. In autosomal dominant inheritance, one mutated copy of the AQP2 gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus  - Genetic Testing Registry: Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus  - Genetic Testing Registry: Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, X-linked  - Genetic Testing Registry: Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, autosomal  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: ADH  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Diabetes Insipidus - Nephrogenic   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus is a disorder of water balance. The body normally balances fluid intake with the excretion of fluid in urine. However, people with neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus produce too much urine (polyuria), which causes them to be excessively thirsty (polydipsia). Affected people need to urinate frequently, which can disrupt daily activities and sleep.  People with neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus can quickly become dehydrated if they do not drink enough water. Dehydration can lead to constipation and dry skin. If the disorder is not treated, more serious complications of dehydration can occur. These include confusion, low blood pressure, seizures, and coma.  Neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus can be either acquired or familial. The acquired form is brought on by injuries, tumors, and other factors, and can occur at any time during life. The familial form is caused by genetic mutations; its signs and symptoms usually become apparent in childhood and worsen over time.  Neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus should not be confused with diabetes mellitus, which is much more common. Diabetes mellitus is characterized by high blood sugar levels resulting from a shortage of the hormone insulin or an insensitivity to this hormone. Although neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus and diabetes mellitus have some features in common, they are separate disorders with different causes.
Neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus is thought to be rare, although its exact incidence is unknown. The acquired form occurs much more frequently than the familial form.
The familial form of neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus is caused by mutations in the AVP gene. This gene provides instructions for making a hormone called vasopressin or antidiuretic hormone (ADH). This hormone, which is produced and stored in the brain, helps control the body's water balance.  The kidneys filter the blood to remove waste and excess fluid, which are stored in the bladder as urine. ADH controls the balance between fluid intake and urine excretion. Normally, when a person's fluid intake is low or when a lot of fluid is lost (for example, through sweating), the brain releases more ADH into the bloodstream. High levels of this hormone direct the kidneys to reabsorb more water and to make less urine. When fluid intake is adequate, the brain releases less ADH. Lower levels of this hormone cause the kidneys to reabsorb less water and to make more urine.  Mutations in the AVP gene result in progressive damage to the brain cells where ADH is produced. These cells ultimately die, causing a shortage of ADH. Without this hormone, the kidneys do not reabsorb water as they should, and the body makes excessive amounts of urine. These problems with water balance are characteristic of neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus.  The acquired form of neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus results when the areas of the brain that produce or store ADH are damaged by head injuries, brain tumors, brain surgery, certain diseases and infections, or bleeding in the brain. A loss of ADH disrupts the body's water balance, leading to excessive urine production and the other features of the disorder.  In 30 to 50 percent of all cases of neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus, the cause of the disorder is unknown. Studies suggest that some of these cases may have an autoimmune basis. Autoimmune disorders occur when the immune system malfunctions and attacks the body's own tissues and organs. For unknown reasons, in some people with neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus the immune system appears to damage the brain cells that normally produce ADH.
Familial neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus is almost always inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered AVP gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  In a few affected families, the condition has had an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. Autosomal recessive inheritance means that both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: ADH  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Diabetes Insipidus - Central   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care