Diabetes means your blood glucose (often called blood sugar) is too high. Your blood always has some glucose in it because your body needs glucose for energy to keep you going. But too much glucose in the blood isn't good for your health. Glucose comes from the food you eat and is also made in your liver and muscles. Your blood carries the glucose to all of the cells in your body. Insulin is a chemical (a hormone) made by the pancreas. The pancreas releases insulin into the blood. Insulin helps the glucose from food get into your cells. If your body does not make enough insulin or if the insulin doesn't work the way it should, glucose can't get into your cells. It stays in your blood instead. Your blood glucose level then gets too high, causing pre-diabetes or diabetes.
Many people with diabetes experience one or more symptoms, including extreme thirst or hunger, a frequent need to urinate and/or fatigue. Some lose weight without trying. Additional signs include sores that heal slowly, dry, itchy skin, loss of feeling or tingling in the feet and blurry eyesight. Some people with diabetes, however, have no symptoms at all.
Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease. In an autoimmune reaction, antibodies, or immune cells, attach to the body's own healthy tissues by mistake, signaling the body to attack them. At present, scientists do not know exactly what causes the body's immune system to attack the insulin-producing cells in the pancreas in people with type 1 diabetes. However, many believe that both genetic factors and environmental factors are involved. Studies now are underway to identify these factors and prevent type 1 diabetes in people at risk. Type 2 diabetesthe most common form of diabetesis caused by a combination of factors, including insulin resistance, a condition in which the bodys muscle, fat, and liver cells do not use insulin effectively. Type 2 diabetes develops when the body can no longer produce enough insulin to compensate for the impaired ability to use insulin.  Get more details about who should be tested for diabetes.
Diabetes is a very serious disease. Over time, diabetes that is not well managed causes serious damage to the eyes, kidneys, nerves, and heart, gums and teeth. If you have diabetes, you are more likely than someone who does not have diabetes to have heart disease or a stroke. People with diabetes also tend to develop heart disease or stroke at an earlier age than others. The best way to protect yourself from the serious complications of diabetes is to manage your blood glucose, blood pressure, and cholesterol and avoid smoking. It is not always easy, but people who make an ongoing effort to manage their diabetes can greatly improve their overall health.
Diabetes means your blood glucose, or blood sugar, levels are too high. With type 2 diabetes, the more common type, your body does not make or use insulin well. Insulin is a hormone that helps glucose get into your cells to give them energy. Without insulin, too much glucose stays in your blood. Over time, high blood glucose can lead to serious problems with your heart, eyes, kidneys, nerves, and gums and teeth.    You have a higher risk of type 2 diabetes if you are older, obese, have a family history of diabetes, or do not exercise. Having prediabetes also increases your risk. Prediabetes means that your blood sugar is higher than normal but not high enough to be called diabetes.    The symptoms of type 2 diabetes appear slowly. Some people do not notice symptoms at all. The symptoms can include       - Being very thirsty    - Urinating often    - Feeling very hungry or tired    - Losing weight without trying    - Having sores that heal slowly    - Having blurry eyesight       Blood tests can show if you have diabetes. One type of test, the A1C, can also check on how you are managing your diabetes. Many people can manage their diabetes through healthy eating, physical activity, and blood glucose testing. Some people also need to take diabetes medicines.    NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
Diabetes means your blood glucose, or blood sugar, levels are too high. With type 1 diabetes, your pancreas does not make insulin. Insulin is a hormone that helps glucose get into your cells to give them energy. Without insulin, too much glucose stays in your blood. Over time, high blood glucose can lead to serious problems with your heart, eyes, kidneys, nerves, and gums and teeth.     Type 1 diabetes happens most often in children and young adults but can appear at any age. Symptoms may include       -  Being very thirsty     -  Urinating often     -  Feeling very hungry or tired     -  Losing weight without trying     -  Having sores that heal slowly     -  Having dry, itchy skin     -  Losing the feeling in your feet or having tingling in your feet     -  Having blurry eyesight        A blood test can show if you have diabetes. If you do, you will need to take insulin for the rest of your life. A blood test called the A1C can check to see how well you are managing your diabetes.    NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
If you have diabetes, your blood glucose, or blood sugar, levels are too high. Over time, this can cause problems with other body functions, such as your kidneys, nerves, feet, and eyes. Having diabetes can also put you at a higher risk for heart disease and bone and joint disorders. Other long-term complications of diabetes include skin problems, digestive problems, sexual dysfunction, and problems with your teeth and gums.     Very high or very low blood sugar levels can also lead to emergencies in people with diabetes. The cause can be an underlying infection, certain medicines, or even the medicines you take to control your diabetes. If you feel nauseated, sluggish or shaky, seek emergency care.    NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
The causes of type 1 diabetes are unknown, although several risk factors have been identified. The risk of developing type 1 diabetes is increased by certain variants of the HLA-DQA1, HLA-DQB1, and HLA-DRB1 genes. These genes provide instructions for making proteins that play a critical role in the immune system. The HLA-DQA1, HLA-DQB1, and HLA-DRB1 genes belong to a family of genes called the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) complex. The HLA complex helps the immune system distinguish the body's own proteins from proteins made by foreign invaders such as viruses and bacteria.  Type 1 diabetes is generally considered to be an autoimmune disorder. Autoimmune disorders occur when the immune system attacks the body's own tissues and organs. For unknown reasons, in people with type 1 diabetes the immune system damages the insulin-producing beta cells in the pancreas. Damage to these cells impairs insulin production and leads to the signs and symptoms of type 1 diabetes.  HLA genes, including HLA-DQA1, HLA-DQB1, and HLA-DRB1, have many variations, and individuals have a certain combination of these variations, called a haplotype. Certain HLA haplotypes are associated with a higher risk of developing type 1 diabetes, with particular combinations of HLA-DQA1, HLA-DQB1, and HLA-DRB1 gene variations resulting in the highest risk. These haplotypes seem to increase the risk of an inappropriate immune response to beta cells. However, these variants are also found in the general population, and only about 5 percent of individuals with the gene variants develop type 1 diabetes. HLA variations account for approximately 40 percent of the genetic risk for the condition. Other HLA variations appear to be protective against the disease. Additional contributors, such as environmental factors and variations in other genes, are also thought to influence the development of this complex disorder.
A predisposition to develop type 1 diabetes is passed through generations in families, but the inheritance pattern is unknown.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of type 1 diabetes:  - Food and Drug Administration: Blood Glucose Measuring Devices  - Food and Drug Administration: Insulin  - Genetic Testing Registry: Diabetes mellitus type 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Diabetes mellitus, insulin-dependent, 10  - Genetic Testing Registry: Diabetes mellitus, insulin-dependent, 11  - Genetic Testing Registry: Diabetes mellitus, insulin-dependent, 12  - Genetic Testing Registry: Diabetes mellitus, insulin-dependent, 13  - Genetic Testing Registry: Diabetes mellitus, insulin-dependent, 15  - Genetic Testing Registry: Diabetes mellitus, insulin-dependent, 17  - Genetic Testing Registry: Diabetes mellitus, insulin-dependent, 18  - Genetic Testing Registry: Diabetes mellitus, insulin-dependent, 19  - Genetic Testing Registry: Diabetes mellitus, insulin-dependent, 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Diabetes mellitus, insulin-dependent, 20  - Genetic Testing Registry: Diabetes mellitus, insulin-dependent, 21  - Genetic Testing Registry: Diabetes mellitus, insulin-dependent, 22  - Genetic Testing Registry: Diabetes mellitus, insulin-dependent, 23  - Genetic Testing Registry: Diabetes mellitus, insulin-dependent, 24  - Genetic Testing Registry: Diabetes mellitus, insulin-dependent, 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Diabetes mellitus, insulin-dependent, 4  - Genetic Testing Registry: Diabetes mellitus, insulin-dependent, 5  - Genetic Testing Registry: Diabetes mellitus, insulin-dependent, 6  - Genetic Testing Registry: Diabetes mellitus, insulin-dependent, 7  - Genetic Testing Registry: Diabetes mellitus, insulin-dependent, 8  - Genetic Testing Registry: Diabetes mellitus, insulin-dependent, X-linked, susceptibility to  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Anti-Insulin Antibody Test  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Home Blood Sugar Testing  - MedlinePlus Health Topic: Islet Cell Transplantation  - MedlinePlus Health Topic: Pancreas Transplantation  - Type 1 Diabetes in Adults: National Clinical Guideline for Diagnosis and Management in Primary and Secondary Care (2004)  - Type 1 Diabetes: Diagnosis and Management of Type 1 Diabetes in Children and Young People (2004)   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Diabetes is a complex group of diseases with a variety of causes. People with diabetes have high blood glucose, also called high blood sugar or hyperglycemia.
                
Diabetes is a disorder of metabolismthe way the body uses digested food for energy. The digestive tract breaks down carbohydratessugars and starches found in many foodsinto glucose, a form of sugar that enters the bloodstream. With the help of the hormone insulin, cells throughout the body absorb glucose and use it for energy. Diabetes develops when the body doesnt make enough insulin or is not able to use insulin effectively, or both.
                
Insulin is made in the pancreas, an organ located behind the stomach. The pancreas contains clusters of cells called islets. Beta cells within the islets make insulin and release it into the blood.
                
If beta cells dont produce enough insulin, or the body doesnt respond to the insulin that is present, glucose builds up in the blood instead of being absorbed by cells in the body, leading to prediabetes or diabetes. Prediabetes is a condition in which blood glucose levels or A1C levelswhich reflect average blood glucose levelsare higher than normal but not high enough to be diagnosed as diabetes. In diabetes, the bodys cells are starved of energy despite high blood glucose levels.
                
Over time, high blood glucose damages nerves and blood vessels, leading to complications such as heart disease, stroke, kidney disease, blindness, dental disease, and amputations. Other complications of diabetes may include increased susceptibility to other diseases, loss of mobility with aging, depression, and pregnancy problems. No one is certain what starts the processes that cause diabetes, but scientists believe genes and environmental factors interact to cause diabetes in most cases.
                
The two main types of diabetes are type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes. A third type, gestational diabetes, develops only during pregnancy. Other types of diabetes are caused by defects in specific genes, diseases of the pancreas, certain drugs or chemicals, infections, and other conditions. Some people show signs of both type 1 and type 2 diabetes.
Insulin Resistance and Beta Cell Dysfunction
                
Hormones produced by the placenta and other pregnancy-related factors contribute to insulin resistance, which occurs in all women during late pregnancy. Insulin resistance increases the amount of insulin needed to control blood glucose levels. If the pancreas cant produce enough insulin due to beta cell dysfunction, gestational diabetes occurs.
                
As with type 2 diabetes, excess weight is linked to gestational diabetes. Overweight or obese women are at particularly high risk for gestational diabetes because they start pregnancy with a higher need for insulin due to insulin resistance. Excessive weight gain during pregnancy may also increase risk.
                
Family History
                
Having a family history of diabetes is also a risk factor for gestational diabetes, suggesting that genes play a role in its development. Genetics may also explain why the disorder occurs more frequently in African Americans, American Indians, and Hispanics/Latinos. Many gene variants or combinations of variants may increase a womans risk for developing gestational diabetes. Studies have found several gene variants associated with gestational diabetes, but these variants account for only a small fraction of women with gestational diabetes.
                
Future Risk of Type 2 Diabetes
                
Because a womans hormones usually return to normal levels soon after giving birth, gestational diabetes disappears in most women after delivery. However, women who have gestational diabetes are more likely to develop gestational diabetes with future pregnancies and develop type 2 diabetes.3 Women with gestational diabetes should be tested for persistent diabetes 6 to 12 weeks after delivery and at least every 3 years thereafter.
                
Also, exposure to high glucose levels during gestation increases a childs risk for becoming overweight or obese and for developing type 2 diabetes later on. The result may be a cycle of diabetes affecting multiple generations in a family. For both mother and child, maintaining a healthy body weight and being physically active may help prevent type 2 diabetes.
- Diabetes is a complex group of diseases with a variety of causes. Scientists believe genes and environmental factors interact to cause diabetes in most cases.  - People with diabetes have high blood glucose, also called high blood sugar or hyperglycemia. Diabetes develops when the body doesnt make enough insulin or is not able to use insulin effectively, or both.  - Insulin is a hormone made by beta cells in the pancreas. Insulin helps cells throughout the body absorb and use glucose for energy. If the body does not produce enough insulin or cannot use insulin effectively, glucose builds up in the blood instead of being absorbed by cells in the body, and the body is starved of energy.  - Prediabetes is a condition in which blood glucose levels or A1C levels are higher than normal but not high enough to be diagnosed as diabetes. People with prediabetes can substantially reduce their risk of developing diabetes by losing weight and increasing physical activity.  - The two main types of diabetes are type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes. Gestational diabetes is a third form of diabetes that develops only during pregnancy.  - Type 1 diabetes is caused by a lack of insulin due to the destruction of insulin-producing beta cells. In type 1 diabetesan autoimmune diseasethe bodys immune system attacks and destroys the beta cells.  - Type 2 diabetesthe most common form of diabetesis caused by a combination of factors, including insulin resistance, a condition in which the bodys muscle, fat, and liver cells do not use insulin effectively. Type 2 diabetes develops when the body can no longer produce enough insulin to compensate for the impaired ability to use insulin.  - Scientists believe gestational diabetes is caused by the hormonal changes and metabolic demands of pregnancy together with genetic and environmental factors. Risk factors for gestational diabetes include being overweight and having a family history of diabetes.  - Monogenic forms of diabetes are relatively uncommon and are caused by mutations in single genes that limit insulin production, quality, or action in the body.  - Other types of diabetes are caused by diseases and injuries that damage the pancreas; certain chemical toxins and medications; infections; and other conditions.