Here are the risk factors for type 2 diabetes. -  being over 45 years of age  -  being overweight or obese  - having a first-degree relative -- a parent, brother, or sister -- with diabetes  - being African American, American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian American or Pacific Islander, or Hispanic American/Latino. (Watch the video to learn more about native Americans and diabetes risk. To enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. To reduce the video, press the Escape (Esc) button on your keyboard.)  - having gestational diabetes, or giving birth to at least one baby weighing more than 9 pounds  - having blood pressure of 140/90 or higher, or having been told that you have high blood pressure.  - having abnormal cholesterol levels -- an HDL cholesterol level of 35 or lower, or a triglyceride level of 250 or higher  - being inactive or exercising fewer than three times a week.  - having polycystic ovary syndrome, also called PCOS (women only)  - on previous testing, having prediabetes (an A1C level of 5.7 to 6.4 percent), impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) or impaired fasting glucose (IFG)  - history of cardiovascular disease (disease affecting the heart and blood vessels). being over 45 years of age being overweight or obese having a first-degree relative -- a parent, brother, or sister -- with diabetes being African American, American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian American or Pacific Islander, or Hispanic American/Latino. (Watch the video to learn more about native Americans and diabetes risk. To enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. To reduce the video, press the Escape (Esc) button on your keyboard.) having gestational diabetes, or giving birth to at least one baby weighing more than 9 pounds having blood pressure of 140/90 or higher, or having been told that you have high blood pressure. having abnormal cholesterol levels -- an HDL cholesterol level of 35 or lower, or a triglyceride level of 250 or higher being inactive or exercising fewer than three times a week. having polycystic ovary syndrome, also called PCOS (women only) on previous testing, having prediabetes (an A1C level of 5.7 to 6.4 percent), impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) or impaired fasting glucose (IFG) history of cardiovascular disease (disease affecting the heart and blood vessels).
Measles: Make Sure Your Child Is Protected with MMR Vaccine Measles starts with a fever. Soon after, it causes a cough, runny nose, and red eyes. Then a rash of tiny, red spots breaks out. Measles can be serious for young children. Learn about protecting your child from measles with MMR vaccine. Protect your child at every age. Click on your child's age group for vaccine information. View or print age-specific vaccine information [252 KB, 27 pages] Records & Requirements Recording immunizations Finding immunization records Interpreting abbreviations on records Immunization requirements for child care and schools Making the Vaccine Decision How vaccines prevent diseases Vaccine side effects/risks Vaccine ingredients Ensuring vaccine safety Vaccines and your child’s immune system Learn More About Preteen and Teen Vaccines The Vaccines For Children program has helped prevent diseases and save lives…big time! [enlarged view] Watch The Immunization Baby Book Learn what vaccines your child needs, when they are needed, and why it is so important to follow the CDC’s recommended immunization schedule as you flip through this video baby book (4:04 mins) on CDC-TV or on YouTube. Who & When (Immunization Schedules) Birth through 6 Years Schedule [2 pages] Create a schedule for your child 7 through 18 Years Schedule [2 pages] 19 Years and Older Schedule [2 pages] Learn more about how CDC sets the immunization schedule for your family Knowing the childhood vaccination rates in your community is important. More Diseases and the Vaccines that Prevent Them Learn more about the 16 diseases that can be prevented with vaccines, as well as the benefits and risks of vaccination. Learn More About... Adoption and Vaccines Pregnancy Help Paying for Vaccines Evaluating Information on the Web
Type 1 diabetes occurs in 10 to 20 per 100,000 people per year in the United States. By age 18, approximately 1 in 300 people in the United States develop type 1 diabetes. The disorder occurs with similar frequencies in Europe, the United Kingdom, Canada, and New Zealand. Type 1 diabetes occurs much less frequently in Asia and South America, with reported incidences as low as 1 in 1 million per year. For unknown reasons, during the past 20 years the worldwide incidence of type 1 diabetes has been increasing by 2 to 5 percent each year.  Type 1 diabetes accounts for 5 to 10 percent of cases of diabetes worldwide. Most people with diabetes have type 2 diabetes, in which the body continues to produce insulin but becomes less able to use it.
Down syndrome occurs in about 1 in 800 newborns. About 5,300 babies with Down syndrome are born in the United States each year, and an estimated 250,000 people in this country have the condition. Although women of any age can have a child with Down syndrome, the chance of having a child with this condition increases as a woman gets older.