If you have diabetes, your blood glucose, or blood sugar, levels are too high. Over time, this can damage your kidneys. Your kidneys clean your blood. If they are damaged, waste and fluids build up in your blood instead of leaving your body.    Kidney damage from diabetes is called diabetic nephropathy. It begins long before you have symptoms. An early sign of it is small amounts of protein in your urine. A urine test can detect it. A blood test can also help determine how well your kidneys are working.    If the damage continues, your kidneys could fail. In fact, diabetes is the most common cause of kidney failure in the United States. People with kidney failure need either dialysis or a kidney transplant.    You can slow down kidney damage or keep it from getting worse. Controlling your blood sugar and blood pressure, taking your medicines and not eating too much protein can help.    NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
If you have diabetes or pre-diabetes you have an increased risk for heart disease. Diabetic heart disease can be coronary heart disease (CHD), heart failure, and diabetic cardiomyopathy.      Diabetes by itself puts you at risk for heart disease. Other risk factors include        - Family history of heart disease    - Carrying extra weight around the waist    - Abnormal cholesterol levels    - High blood pressure    - Smoking        Some people who have diabetic heart disease have no signs or symptoms of heart disease. Others have some or all of the symptoms of heart disease.      Treatments include medications to treat heart damage or to lower your blood glucose (blood sugar), blood pressure, and cholesterol. If you are not already taking a low dose of aspirin every day, your doctor may suggest it. You also may need surgery or some other medical procedure. Lifestyle changes also help. These include a healthy diet, maintaining a healthy weight, being physically active, and quitting smoking.     NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
Taking action to control risk factors can help prevent or delay heart disease in people who have diabetes and in those who don't. Your risk of heart disease increases with the number of risk factors you have.
                
One step you can take is to adopt a healthy lifestyle. A healthy lifestyle should be part of a lifelong approach to healthy living. A healthy lifestyle includes:
                
Following a healthy diet
                
Maintaining a healthy weight
                
Being physically active
                
Quitting smoking
                
Managing stress
                
You also should know your family history of diabetes and heart disease. If you or someone in your family has diabetes, heart disease, or both, let your doctor know.
                
Your doctor may prescribe medicines to control certain risk factors, such as high blood pressure and high blood cholesterol. Take all of your medicines exactly as your doctor advises.
                
People who have diabetes also need good blood sugar control. Controlling your blood sugar level is good for heart health. Ask your doctor about the best ways to control your blood sugar level.
                
For more information about lifestyle changes and medicines, go to "How Is Diabetic Heart Disease Treated?"
Diabetic kidney disease, also called diabetic nephropathy, is kidney disease caused by diabetes. Even when well controlled, diabetes can lead to chronic kidney disease (CKD) and kidney failure, described as end-stage kidney disease or ESRD when treated with a kidney transplant or blood-filtering treatments called dialysis.
                
Diabetes affects 25.8 million people of all ages in the United States.1 As many as 40 percent of people who have diabetes are expected to develop CKD.2 Diabetes, the most common cause of kidney failure in the United States, accounts for nearly 44 percent of new cases of kidney failure, as illustrated in Figure 1.3
People with diabetic kidney disease do not have symptoms in the early stages. As kidney disease progresses, a person can develop edema, or swelling. Edema happens when the kidneys cannot get rid of the extra fluid and salt in the body. Edema can occur in the legs, feet, or ankles and less often in the hands or face. Once kidney function decreases further, symptoms may include
                
- appetite loss  - nausea  - vomiting  - drowsiness, or feeling tired  - trouble concentrating  - sleep problems  - increased or decreased urination  - generalized itching or numbness  - dry skin  - headaches  - weight loss  - darkened skin  - muscle cramps  - shortness of breath  - chest pain
A health care provider diagnoses diabetic kidney disease based on
                
- a medical and family history  - a physical exam  - urine tests  - a blood test
                
Medical and Family History
                
Taking a medical and family history is one of the first things a health care provider may do to help diagnose diabetic kidney disease. He or she will ask about the symptoms and the patients diabetes history.
                
Physical Exam
                
After taking a medical and family history, a health care provider will perform a physical exam. During a physical exam, a health care provider usually
                
- examines the patients body to check for changes in skin color  - taps on specific areas of the patients body, checking for swelling of the feet, ankles, or lower legs
                
Urine Tests
                
Dipstick test for albumin. A dipstick test performed on a urine sample can detect the presence of albumin in the urine. A patient collects the urine sample in a special container in a health care providers office or a commercial facility. The office or facility tests the sample onsite or sends it to a lab for analysis. For the test, a nurse or technician places a strip of chemically treated paper, called a dipstick, into the urine. Patches on the dipstick change color when blood or protein is present in urine.
                
Urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio. A health care provider uses this measurement to estimate the amount of albumin passed into the urine over a 24-hour period. The patient collects a urine sample during an appointment with the health care provider. Creatinine is a waste product that is filtered in the kidneys and passed into the urine. A high urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio indicates that the kidneys are leaking large amounts of albumin into the urine. A urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio above 30 mg/g may be a sign of kidney disease.
                
Blood Test
                
A blood test involves having blood drawn at a health care providers office or a commercial facility and sending the sample to a lab for analysis. A health care provider may order a blood test to estimate how much blood the kidneys filter each minute, called the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR). The results of the test indicate the following:
                
- eGFR of 60 or above is in the normal range  - eGFR below 60 may indicate kidney damage  - eGFR of 15 or below may indicate kidney failure
A health care provider may treat kidney failure due to diabetic kidney disease with dialysis or a kidney transplant. In some cases, people with diabetic kidney disease receive kidney and pancreas transplants.
                
In most cases, people with diabetic kidney disease start dialysis earlier than people with kidney failure who do not have diabetes. People with diabetic end-stage kidney disease who receive a kidney transplant have a much better survival rate than those people on dialysis, although survival rates for those on dialysis have increasingly improved over time. However, people who receive a kidney transplant and do not have diabetes have a higher survival rate than people with diabetic kidney disease who receive a transplant.5
                
More information about treatment options for kidney failure is provided in the NIDDK health topics:
                
- Treatment Methods for Kidney Failure: Hemodialysis  - Treatment Methods for Kidney Failure: Peritoneal Dialysis  - Treatment Methods for Kidney Failure: Transplantation
- Diabetic kidney disease, also called diabetic nephropathy, is kidney disease caused by diabetes.  - People with diabetes have high blood glucose, also called high blood sugar or hyperglycemia.  - At the onset of diabetes, blood flow into the kidneys increases, which may strain the glomeruli and lessen their ability to filter blood.  - Higher levels of blood glucose lead to the buildup of extra material in the glomeruli, which increases the force of the blood moving through the kidneys and creates stress in the glomeruli.  - Many people with diabetes can develop high blood pressure, another factor in the development of kidney disease. High blood pressure, also called hypertension, is an increase in the amount of force that blood places on blood vessels as it moves through the entire body.  - Diabetic kidney disease takes many years to develop.  - People with diabetic kidney disease do not have any symptoms in the early stages. As kidney disease progresses, a person can develop edema, or swelling. Edema happens when the kidneys cannot get rid of the extra fluid and salt in the body. Edema can occur in the legs, feet, or ankles and less often in the hands or face.  - Once kidney function decreases further, symptoms may include      - appetite loss    - nausea    - vomiting    - drowsiness, or feeling tired    - trouble concentrating    - sleep problems    - increased or decreased urination    - generalized itching or numbness    - dry skin    - headaches    - weight loss    - darkened skin    - muscle cramps    - shortness of breath    - chest pain    - People can prevent or slow the progression of diabetic kidney disease by      - taking medication to control high blood pressure    - managing blood glucose levels    - making changes in their eating, diet, and nutrition    - losing weight if they are overweight or obese    - getting regular physical activity