Diabetes mellitus type 1 (DM1) is a condition in which cells in the pancreas (beta cells) stop producing insulin, causing abnormally high blood sugar levels. Lack of insulin results in the inability of the body to use glucose for energy and control the amount of sugar in the blood. DM1 can occur at any age, but usually develops by early adulthood, most often in adolescence. Symptoms of high blood sugar may include frequent urination, excessive thirst, fatigue, blurred vision, tingling or loss of feeling in the hands and feet, and weight loss. The exact cause of DM1 is unknown, but having certain "variants" of specific genes may increase a person's risk to develop the condition. A predisposition to develop DM1 runs in families, but no known inheritance pattern exists. Treatment includes blood sugar control and insulin replacement therapy. Improper control can cause recurrence of high blood sugar, or abnormally low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) during exercise or when eating is delayed. If not treated, the condition can be life-threatening. Over many years, chronic high blood sugar may be associated with a variety of complications that affect many parts of the body.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Diabetes mellitus type 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the immune system - Diabetes mellitus - Heterogeneous - Hyperglycemia - Ketoacidosis - Polydipsia - Polyphagia - Polyuria - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Diabetes mellitus type 1 (DM1) itself is not inherited, but a predisposition to developing the condition can run in families. While some people with a family history of DM1 may be at an increased risk, most will not have the condition. While the exact cause is not known, some genetic risk factors have been found. The risk of developing DM1 is increased by having certain versions (variants) of genes, which belong to a family of genes called the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) complex. HLA genes have many variations, and people have a certain combination of these variations, called a haplotype. Certain HLA haplotypes are associated with a higher risk of developing DM1, with particular combinations causing the highest risk. However, these variants are also found in the general population, and only about 5% of people with the gene variants develop DM1. Other genes, as well as a variety of other factors, are thought to influence the risk for DM1 also. Because there is no specific inheritance pattern associated with DM1, it is difficult to predict whether another family member will develop the condition. Generally, the risk is higher if a parent or sibling is affected. In some cases, genetic testing can be done to determine if someone who has a family history is at increased risk of developing the condition.  More information can be found on the America Diabetes Association's Web site, which has an article entitled Genetics of Diabetes. People with specific questions about genetic risks to themselves or family members should speak with their health care provider or a genetics professional.
Transient neonatal diabetes mellitus (TNDB) is a type of diabetes that appears within the first few weeks of life but is transient; affected infants go into remission within a few months, with possible relapse to permanent diabetes in adolescence or adulthood. Affected individuals have slow growth before birth followed by hyperglycemia, dehydration and failure to thrive in infancy. Approximately 70% of cases are caused by the overactivity of certain genes in a region of the long (q) arm of chromosome 6 called 6q24. These cases are referred to as 6q24-related TNDB; most (but not all) of these cases are not inherited. Other genetic causes include mutations in the KCNJ11 and ABCC8 genes, which usually cause permanent neonatal diabetes. Treatment may include rehydration and intravenous insulin at the time of diagnosis, followed by subcutaneous insulin.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Transient neonatal diabetes mellitus. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Type II diabetes mellitus 2/7 Autosomal dominant inheritance - Dehydration - Hyperglycemia - Intrauterine growth retardation - Severe failure to thrive - Transient neonatal diabetes mellitus - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus (PNDB) is a type of diabetes that appears within the first 6 months of life and persists throughout life. Affected individuals have slow growth before birth followed by hyperglycemia, dehydration and failure to thrive in infancy. Some individuals also have neurological problems including developmental delay and epilepsy; when these problems are present with PNDB, it is called DEND syndrome. A few individuals with PNDB also have an underdeveloped pancreas and may have digestive problems. PNDB is caused by mutations in any one of several genes (some of which have not yet been identified) including the KCNJ11, ABCC8, and INS genes. It may be inherited in an autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant manner. Treatment includes rehydration, insulin therapy and/or long-term therapy with oral sulfonylureas (in some cases).
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the ear - Abnormality of the immune system - Anteverted nares - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Beta-cell dysfunction - Clinodactyly - Diabetes mellitus - Downturned corners of mouth - Hyperglycemia - Hypsarrhythmia - Intrauterine growth retardation - Ketoacidosis - Limb joint contracture - Long philtrum - Motor delay - Muscle weakness - Muscular hypotonia of the trunk - Peripheral neuropathy - Prominent metopic ridge - Ptosis - Radial deviation of finger - Seizures - Small for gestational age - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
6q24-related transient neonatal diabetes mellitus is a type of diabetes that occurs in infants. This form of diabetes is characterized by high blood sugar levels (hyperglycemia) resulting from a shortage of the hormone insulin. Insulin controls how much glucose (a type of sugar) is passed from the blood into cells for conversion to energy.  People with 6q24-related transient neonatal diabetes mellitus experience very slow growth before birth (severe intrauterine growth retardation). Affected infants have hyperglycemia and an excessive loss of fluids (dehydration), usually beginning in the first week of life. Signs and symptoms of this form of diabetes are transient, which means that they gradually lessen over time and generally disappear between the ages of 3 months and 18 months. Diabetes may recur, however, especially during childhood illnesses or pregnancy. Up to half of individuals with 6q24-related transient neonatal diabetes mellitus develop permanent diabetes mellitus later in life.  Other features of 6q24-related transient neonatal diabetes mellitus that occur in some affected individuals include an unusually large tongue (macroglossia); a soft out-pouching around the belly-button (an umbilical hernia); malformations of the brain, heart, or kidneys; weak muscle tone (hypotonia); deafness; and developmental delay.
Between 1 in 215,000 and 1 in 400,000 babies are born with diabetes mellitus. In about half of these babies, the diabetes is transient. Researchers estimate that approximately 70 percent of transient diabetes in newborns is caused by 6q24-related transient neonatal diabetes mellitus.
Most cases of 6q24-related transient neonatal diabetes mellitus are not inherited, particularly those caused by paternal uniparental disomy. In these cases, genetic changes occur as random events during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs and sperm) or in early embryonic development. Affected people typically have no history of the disorder in their family.  Sometimes, the genetic change responsible for 6q24-related transient neonatal diabetes mellitus is inherited. For example, a duplication of genetic material on the paternal chromosome 6 can be passed from one generation to the next.  When 6q24-related transient neonatal diabetes mellitus is caused by ZFP57 gene mutations, it is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Autosomal recessive inheritance means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of 6q24-related transient neonatal diabetes mellitus:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Diabetes Mellitus, 6q24-Related Transient Neonatal  - Genetic Testing Registry: Transient neonatal diabetes mellitus 1  - The Merck Manual for Healthcare Professionals  - University of Chicago Kovler Diabetes Center   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus is a type of diabetes that first appears within the first 6 months of life and persists throughout the lifespan. This form of diabetes is characterized by high blood sugar levels (hyperglycemia) resulting from a shortage of the hormone insulin. Insulin controls how much glucose (a type of sugar) is passed from the blood into cells for conversion to energy.  Individuals with permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus experience slow growth before birth (intrauterine growth retardation). Affected infants have hyperglycemia and an excessive loss of fluids (dehydration) and are unable to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive).  In some cases, people with permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus also have certain neurological problems, including developmental delay and recurrent seizures (epilepsy). This combination of developmental delay, epilepsy, and neonatal diabetes is called DEND syndrome. Intermediate DEND syndrome is a similar combination but with milder developmental delay and without epilepsy.  A small number of individuals with permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus have an underdeveloped pancreas. Because the pancreas produces digestive enzymes as well as secreting insulin and other hormones, affected individuals experience digestive problems such as fatty stools and an inability to absorb fat-soluble vitamins.
About 1 in 400,000 infants are diagnosed with diabetes mellitus in the first few months of life. However, in about half of these babies the condition is transient and goes away on its own by age 18 months. The remainder are considered to have permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus.
Permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus may be caused by mutations in several genes.  About 30 percent of individuals with permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus have mutations in the KCNJ11 gene. An additional 20 percent of people with permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus have mutations in the ABCC8 gene. These genes provide instructions for making parts (subunits) of the ATP-sensitive potassium (K-ATP) channel. Each K-ATP channel consists of eight subunits, four produced from the KCNJ11 gene and four from the ABCC8 gene.  K-ATP channels are found across cell membranes in the insulin-secreting beta cells of the pancreas. These channels open and close in response to the amount of glucose in the bloodstream. Closure of the channels in response to increased glucose triggers the release of insulin out of beta cells and into the bloodstream, which helps control blood sugar levels.  Mutations in the KCNJ11 or ABCC8 gene that cause permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus result in K-ATP channels that do not close, leading to reduced insulin secretion from beta cells and impaired blood sugar control.  Mutations in the INS gene, which provides instructions for making insulin, have been identified in about 20 percent of individuals with permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus. Insulin is produced in a precursor form called proinsulin, which consists of a single chain of protein building blocks (amino acids). The proinsulin chain is cut (cleaved) to form individual pieces called the A and B chains, which are joined together by connections called disulfide bonds to form insulin. Mutations in the INS gene are believed to disrupt the cleavage of the proinsulin chain or the binding of the A and B chains to form insulin, leading to impaired blood sugar control.  Permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus can also be caused by mutations in other genes, some of which have not been identified.
Permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus can have different inheritance patterns.  When this condition is caused by mutations in the KCNJ11 or INS gene it is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In about 90 percent of these cases, the condition results from new mutations in the gene and occurs in people with no history of the disorder in their family. In the remaining cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent.  When permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus is caused by mutations in the ABCC8 gene, it may be inherited in either an autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive pattern. In autosomal recessive inheritance, both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.  Less commonly the condition is caused by mutations in other genes, and in these cases it is also inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Permanent Neonatal Diabetes Mellitus  - Genetic Testing Registry: Pancreatic agenesis, congenital  - Genetic Testing Registry: Permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus  - University of Chicago Kovler Diabetes Center   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care