Diarrhea means that you have loose, watery stools more than three times in one day. You may also have cramps, bloating, nausea and an urgent need to have a bowel movement.     Causes of diarrhea include bacteria, viruses or parasites, certain medicines, food intolerances and diseases that affect the stomach, small intestine or colon. In many cases, no cause can be found.     Although usually not harmful, diarrhea can become dangerous or signal a more serious problem. You should talk to your doctor if you have a strong pain in your abdomen or rectum, a fever, blood in your stools, severe diarrhea for more than three days or symptoms of dehydration. If your child has diarrhea, do not hesitate to call the doctor for advice. Diarrhea can be dangerous in children.     NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
Acute diarrhea is usually caused by a bacterial, viral, or parasitic infection. Chronic diarrhea is usually related to a functional disorder such as irritable bowel syndrome or an intestinal disease such as Crohns disease.
                
The most common causes of diarrhea include the following:
                
- Bacterial infections. Several types of bacteria consumed through contaminated food or water can cause diarrhea. Common culprits include Campylobacter, Salmonella, Shigella, and Escherichia coli (E. coli).  - Viral infections. Many viruses cause diarrhea, including rotavirus, norovirus, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus, and viral hepatitis. Infection with the rotavirus is the most common cause of acute diarrhea in children. Rotavirus diarrhea usually resolves in 3 to 7 days but can cause problems digesting lactose for up to a month or longer.  - Parasites. Parasites can enter the body through food or water and settle in the digestive system. Parasites that cause diarrhea include Giardia lamblia, Entamoeba histolytica, and Cryptosporidium.  - Functional bowel disorders. Diarrhea can be a symptom of irritable bowel syndrome.  - Intestinal diseases. Inflammatory bowel disease, ulcerative colitis, Crohns disease, and celiac disease often lead to diarrhea.  - Food intolerances and sensitivities. Some people have difficulty digesting certain ingredients, such as lactose, the sugar found in milk and milk products. Some people may have diarrhea if they eat certain types of sugar substitutes in excessive quantities.  - Reaction to medicines. Antibiotics, cancer drugs, and antacids containing magnesium can all cause diarrhea.
                
Some people develop diarrhea after stomach surgery, which may cause food to move through the digestive system more quickly.
                
People who visit certain foreign countries are at risk for travelers diarrhea, which is caused by eating food or drinking water contaminated with bacteria, viruses, or parasites. Travelers diarrhea can be a problem for people traveling to developing countries in Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the Caribbean. Visitors to Canada, most European countries, Japan, Australia, and New Zealand do not face much risk for travelers diarrhea.
                
In many cases, the cause of diarrhea cannot be found. As long as diarrhea goes away on its own within 1 to 2 days, finding the cause is not usually necessary.
Diarrhea may be accompanied by cramping, abdominal pain, nausea, an urgent need to use the bathroom, or loss of bowel control. Some infections that cause diarrhea can also cause a fever and chills or bloody stools.
                
Dehydration
                
Diarrhea can cause dehydration. Loss of electrolytes through dehydration affects the amount of water in the body, muscle activity, and other important functions.
                
Dehydration is particularly dangerous in children, older adults, and people with weakened immune systems. Dehydration must be treated promptly to avoid serious health problems, such as organ damage, shock, or comaa sleeplike state in which a person is not conscious.
                
Signs of dehydration in adults include
                
- thirst  - less frequent urination than usual  - dark-colored urine  - dry skin  - fatigue  - dizziness  - light-headedness
                
Signs of dehydration in infants and young children include
                
- dry mouth and tongue  - no tears when crying  - no wet diapers for 3 hours or more  - sunken eyes, cheeks, or soft spot in the skull  - high fever  - listlessness or irritability
                
Also, when people are dehydrated, their skin does not flatten back to normal right away after being gently pinched and released.
                
Anyone with signs of dehydration should see a health care provider immediately. Severe dehydration may require hospitalization.
                
Although drinking plenty of water is important in preventing dehydration, water does not contain electrolytes. Adults can prevent dehydration by also drinking liquids that contain electrolytes, such as fruit juices, sports drinks, caffeine-free soft drinks, and broths. Children with diarrhea should be given oral rehydration solutions such as Pedialyte, Naturalyte, Infalyte, and CeraLyte to prevent dehydration.
If acute diarrhea lasts 2 days or less, diagnostic tests are usually not necessary. If diarrhea lasts longer or is accompanied by symptoms such as fever or bloody stools, a doctor may perform tests to determine the cause.
                
Diagnostic tests to find the cause of diarrhea may include the following:
                
- Medical history and physical examination. The doctor will ask about eating habits and medication use and will perform a physical examination to look for signs of illness.  - Stool culture. A sample of stool is analyzed in a laboratory to check for bacteria, parasites, or other signs of disease and infection.  - Blood tests. Blood tests can be helpful in ruling out certain diseases.  - Fasting tests. To find out if a food intolerance or allergy is causing the diarrhea, the doctor may ask a person to avoid foods with lactose, carbohydrates, wheat, or other ingredients to see whether the diarrhea responds to a change in diet.  - Sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy. These tests may be used to look for signs of intestinal diseases that cause chronic diarrhea. For sigmoidoscopy, the doctor uses a thin, flexible, lighted tube with a lens on the end to look at the inside of the rectum and lower part of the colon. Colonoscopy is similar to sigmoidoscopy, but it allows the doctor to view the entire colon.
In most cases of diarrhea, the only treatment necessary is replacing lost fluids and electrolytes to prevent dehydration.
                
Over-the-counter medicines such as loperamide (Imodium) and bismuth subsalicylate (Pepto-Bismol and Kaopectate) may help stop diarrhea in adults. However, people with bloody diarrheaa sign of bacterial or parasitic infectionshould not use these medicines. If diarrhea is caused by bacteria or parasites, over-the-counter medicines may prolong the problem, so doctors usually prescribe antibiotics instead.
                
Medications to treat diarrhea in adults can be dangerous for infants and children and should only be given with a doctors guidance.
Until diarrhea subsides, avoiding caffeine and foods that are greasy, high in fiber, or sweet may lessen symptoms. These foods can aggravate diarrhea. Some people also have problems digesting lactose during or after a bout of diarrhea. Yogurt, which has less lactose than milk, is often better tolerated. Yogurt with active, live bacterial cultures may even help people recover from diarrhea more quickly.
                
As symptoms improve, soft, bland foods can be added to the diet, including bananas, plain rice, boiled potatoes, toast, crackers, cooked carrots, and baked chicken without the skin or fat. For children, the health care provider may also recommend a bland diet. Once the diarrhea stops, the health care provider will likely encourage children to return to a normal and healthy diet if it can be tolerated. Infants with diarrhea should be given breast milk or full-strength formula as usual, along with oral rehydration solutions. Some children recovering from viral diarrheas have problems digesting lactose for up to a month or more.
Two types of diarrhea can be preventedrotavirus diarrhea and travelers diarrhea.
                
Rotavirus Diarrhea
                
Two oral vaccines have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to protect children from rotavirus infections: rotavirus vaccine, live, oral, pentavalent (RotaTeq); and rotavirus vaccine, live, oral (Rotarix). RotaTeq is given to infants in three doses at 2, 4, and 6 months of age. Rotarix is given in two doses. The first dose is given when infants are 6 weeks old, and the second is given at least 4 weeks later but before infants are 24 weeks old.
                
Parents of infants should discuss rotavirus vaccination with a health care provider. For more information, parents can visit the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention rotavirus vaccination webpage at www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd-vac/rotavirus.
                
Travelers Diarrhea
                
To prevent travelers diarrhea, people traveling from the United States to developing countries should avoid
                
- drinking tap water, using tap water to brush their teeth, or using ice made from tap water  - drinking unpasteurized milk or milk products  - eating raw fruits and vegetables, including lettuce and fruit salads, unless they peel the fruits or vegetables themselves  - eating raw or rare meat and fish  - eating meat or shellfish that is not hot when served  - eating food from street vendors
                
Travelers can drink bottled water, soft drinks, and hot drinks such as coffee or tea.
                
People concerned about travelers diarrhea should talk with a health care provider before traveling. The health care provider may recommend that travelers bring medicine with them in case they develop diarrhea during their trip. Health care providers may advise some peopleespecially people with weakened immune systemsto take antibiotics before and during a trip to help prevent travelers diarrhea. Early treatment with antibiotics can shorten a bout of travelers diarrhea.
Diarrhea is loose, watery stools. Chronic, or long lasting, diarrhea typically lasts for more than 4 weeks. Children with chronic diarrhea may have loose, watery stools continually, or diarrhea may come and go. Chronic diarrhea may go away without treatment, or it may be a symptom of a chronic disease or disorder. Treating the disease or disorder can relieve chronic diarrhea.
                
Chronic diarrhea can affect children of any age:
                
- infantsages 0 to 12 months  - toddlersages 1 to 3 years  - preschool-age childrenages 3 to 5 years  - grade school-age childrenages 5 to 12 years  - adolescentsages 12 to 18 years
                
Diarrhea that lasts only a short time is called acute diarrhea. Acute diarrhea, a common problem, usually lasts a few days and goes away on its own. More information about acute diarrhea is provided in the NIDDK health topics:
                
- Diarrhea  - What I need to know about Diarrhea
Symptoms that accompany chronic diarrhea in children depend on the cause of the diarrhea. Symptoms can include
                
- cramping  - abdominal pain  - nausea or vomiting  - fever  - chills  - bloody stools
                
Children with chronic diarrhea who have malabsorption can experience
                
- bloating and swelling, also called distention, of the abdomen  - changes in appetite  - weight loss or poor weight gain
                

                
Consult a Health Care Provider   A childs parent or caretaker should consult a health care provider if the child   - has diarrhea for more than 24 hours   - is younger than 6 months old   - has received treatment and the diarrhea persists    Children with any of the following symptoms should see a health care provider right away:   - signs of malabsorptionbloating and swelling of the abdomen, changes in appetite, and weight loss or poor weight gain   - severe abdominal or rectal pain   - a fever of 102 degrees or higher   - stools containing blood or pus    More information is provided in the NIDDK health topics:   - Diarrhea   - What I need to know about Diarrhea
The treatment for chronic diarrhea will depend on the cause. Some common causes of chronic diarrhea are treated as follows:
                
- Infections. If a child has prolonged problems digesting certain carbohydrates or proteins after an acute infection, a health care provider may recommend changes in diet. A child may need antibiotics or medications that target parasites to treat infections that do not go away on their own. A health care provider may also prescribe antibiotics to treat small intestinal bacterial overgrowth.    - Functional GI disorders. For toddlers diarrhea, treatment is usually not needed. Most children outgrow toddlers diarrhea by the time they start school. In many children, limiting fruit juice intake and increasing the amount of fiber and fat in the diet may improve symptoms of toddlers diarrhea.  A health care provider may treat IBS with      - changes in diet.    - medication.    - probioticslive microorganisms, usually bacteria, that are similar to microorganisms normally found in the GI tract. Studies have found that probiotics, specifically Bifidobacteria and certain probiotic combinations, improve symptoms of IBS when taken in large enough amounts. However, researchers are still studying the use of probiotics to treat IBS.    - psychological therapy.
                
To help ensure coordinated and safe care, people should discuss their use of complementary and alternative medical practices, including their use of dietary supplements and probiotics, with their health care provider. Read more at www.nccam.nih.gov/health/probiotics.
                

                
- Food allergies and intolerances. A health care provider will recommend changes in diet to manage symptoms of food allergies and intolerances. To treat food allergies, the childs parent or caretaker should remove the food that triggers the allergy from the childs diet.  For children with celiac disease, following a gluten-free diet will stop symptoms, heal existing intestinal damage, and prevent further damage.  The childs parent or caretaker can manage the symptoms of lactose intolerance with changes in the childs diet and by using products that contain the lactase enzyme. Most children with lactose intolerance can tolerate some amount of lactose in their diet. The amount of change needed in the diet depends on how much lactose a child can consume without symptoms.  For children with dietary fructose intolerance, reducing the amount of fructose in the diet can relieve symptoms.    - IBD. A health care provider may use medications, surgery, and changes in diet to treat IBD.
A health care provider may recommend changing a childs diet to treat the cause of chronic diarrhea. Making sure that children receive proper nutrition is important for growth and development. A childs parent or caretaker should talk with a health care provider about changing the childs diet to treat chronic diarrhea.
Diarrhea is frequent, loose, and watery bowel movements. Bowel movements, also called stools, are body wastes passed through the rectum and anus. Stools contain what is left after your digestive system absorbs nutrients and fluids from what you eat and drink. If your body does not absorb the fluids, or if your digestive system produces extra fluids, stools will be loose and watery. Loose stools contain more water, salts, and minerals and weigh more than solid stools.
                
Diarrhea that lasts a short time is called acute diarrhea. Acute diarrhea is a common problem and usually lasts only 1 or 2 days, but it may last longer. Diarrhea that lasts for at least 4 weeks is called chronic diarrhea. Chronic diarrhea symptoms may be continual or they may come and go.
                
*See the Pronunciation Guide for tips on how to say the words in bold type.
Causes of diarrhea include
                
- bacteria from contaminated food or water  - viruses that cause illnesses such as the flu  - parasites, which are tiny organisms found in contaminated food or water  - medicines such as antibiotics  - problems digesting certain foods  - diseases that affect the stomach, small intestine, or colon, such as Crohns disease  - problems with how the colon functions, caused by disorders such as irritable bowel syndrome
                
Sometimes no cause can be found. As long as diarrhea goes away within 1 to 2 days, finding the cause is not usually necessary.
In addition to passing frequent, loose stools, other possible symptoms include
                
- cramps or pain in the abdomenthe area between the chest and hips  - an urgent need to use the bathroom  - loss of bowel control
                
You may feel sick to your stomach or become dehydrated. If a virus or bacteria is the cause of your diarrhea, you may have fever and chills and bloody stools.
                
Dehydration
                
Being dehydrated means your body does not have enough fluid to work properly. Every time you have a bowel movement, you lose fluids. Diarrhea causes you to lose even more fluids. You also lose salts and minerals such as sodium, chloride, and potassium. These salts and minerals affect the amount of water that stays in your body.
                
Dehydration can be serious, especially for children, older adults, and people with weakened immune systems.
                
Signs of dehydration in adults are
                
- being thirsty  - urinating less often than usual  - having dark-colored urine  - having dry skin  - feeling tired  - feeling dizzy or fainting
                
Signs of dehydration in babies and young children are
                
- having a dry mouth and tongue  - crying without tears  - having no wet diapers for 3 hours or more  - having sunken eyes, cheeks, or soft spot in the skull  - having a high fever  - being more cranky or drowsy than usual
                
Also, when people are dehydrated, their skin does not flatten back to normal right away after being gently pinched and released.
To find the cause of diarrhea, the health care provider may
                
- perform a physical exam  - ask about any medicines you are taking  - test your stool or blood to look for bacteria, parasites, or other signs of disease or infection  - ask you to stop eating certain foods to see whether your diarrhea goes away
                
If you have chronic diarrhea, your health care provider may perform other tests to look for signs of disease.
Diarrhea is treated by replacing lost fluids, salts, and minerals to prevent dehydration.
                
Taking medicine to stop diarrhea can be helpful in some cases. Medicines you can buy over the counter without a prescription include loperamide (Imodium) and bismuth subsalicylate (Pepto-Bismol, Kaopectate). Stop taking these medicines if symptoms get worse or if the diarrhea lasts more than 2 days. If you have bloody diarrhea, you should not use over-the-counter diarrhea medicines. These medicines may make diarrhea last longer. The health care provider will usually prescribe antibiotics instead.
                
Over-the-counter medicines for diarrhea may be dangerous for babies and children. Talk with the health care provider before giving your child these medicines.
To prevent dehydration when you have diarrhea, it is important to drink plenty of water, but you also need to drink fluids that contain sodium, chloride, and potassium.
                
- Adults should drink water, fruit juices, sports drinks, sodas without caffeine, and salty broths.  - Children should drink oral rehydration solutionsspecial drinks that contain salts and minerals to prevent dehydration. These drinks include Pedialyte, Naturalyte, Infalyte, and CeraLyte. These drinks are sold in most grocery stores and drugstores.
                
- bananas  - plain rice  - boiled potatoes  - toast  - crackers  - cooked carrots  - baked chicken without the skin or fat
                
If a certain food is the cause of diarrhea, try to avoid it.
                
- drinks with caffeine, such as coffee and cola  - high-fat or greasy foods, such as fried foods  - foods with a lot of fiber, such as citrus fruits  - sweet foods, such as cakes and cookies
                
During or after an episode of diarrhea, some people have trouble digesting lactose, the sugar in milk and milk products. However, you may be able to digest yogurt. Eating yogurt with active, live bacterial cultures may even help you feel better faster.
                
When babies have diarrhea, continue breastfeeding or formula feeding as usual.
                
After you have had diarrhea caused by a virus, problems digesting lactose may last up to 4 to 6 weeks. You may have diarrhea for a short time after you eat or drink milk or milk products.
Two types of diarrhea can be preventedrotavirus diarrhea and travelers diarrhea.
                
Rotavirus Diarrhea
                
Two vaccines, RotaTeq and Rotarix, protect against rotavirusa common virus that causes diarrhea in babies and children. RotaTeq is given to babies in three doses at 2, 4, and 6 months of age. Rotarix is given in two doses. The first dose is given when the baby is 6 weeks old, and the second is given at least 4 weeks later but before the baby is 24 weeks old. To learn more about rotavirus vaccines, talk with your childs health care provider. You can also find more information at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention rotavirus vaccination webpage at www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd-vac/rotavirus.
                
RotaTeq and Rotarix only prevent diarrhea caused by rotavirus. Children who have been vaccinated may still get diarrhea from another cause.
                
Travelers Diarrhea
                

                
People may develop travelers diarrhea while visiting developing areas of the world such as Latin America, Africa, and southern Asia. Travelers diarrhea is caused by eating food or drinking water that contains harmful bacteria, viruses, or parasites.
                
You can prevent travelers diarrhea by being careful:
                
- Do not drink tap water, use tap water to brush your teeth, or use ice cubes made from tap water.  - Do not eat or drink unpasteurized milk or milk products.  - Do not eat raw fruits and vegetables unless they can be peeled and you peel them yourself.  - Do not eat raw or rare meat and fish.  - Do not eat meat or shellfish that is not hot when served to you.  - Do not eat food sold by street vendors.
                
You can drink bottled water, carbonated soft drinks, and hot drinks such as coffee and tea.
                
Before traveling outside the United States, talk with your health care provider. Your health care provider may suggest taking medicine with you. In some cases, taking antibiotics before traveling can help prevent travelers diarrhea. And early treatment with antibiotics can shorten an episode of travelers diarrhea.