Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD) deficiency is a condition in which the body cannot break down the nucleotides thymine and uracil. DPD deficiency can have a wide range of severity; some individuals may have various neurological problems, while others have no signs and symptoms. Signs and symptoms in severely affected individuals begin in infancy and may include seizures, intellectual disability, microcephaly, increased muscle tone (hypertonia), delayed motor skills, and autistic behavior.  All individuals with the condition, regardless of the presence or severity of symptoms, are at risk for severe, toxic reactions to drugs called fluoropyrimidines which are used to treat cancer. Individuals with no symptoms may be diagnosed only by laboratory testing or after exposure to fluoropyrimidines. DPD deficiency is caused by mutations in the DPYD gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Agenesis of corpus callosum 5% Autism - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cerebral atrophy - Coloboma - Delayed speech and language development - Failure to thrive - Growth delay - Hyperactivity - Hypertonia - Intellectual disability - Lethargy - Microcephaly - Microphthalmia - Motor delay - Muscular hypotonia - Nystagmus - Optic atrophy - Phenotypic variability - Reduced dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase activity - Seizures - Tetraplegia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 DPD deficiency is caused by mutations in the DPYD gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD), which is involved in the breakdown of molecules called uracil and thymine. Uracil and thymine are building blocks of DNA, RNA, and molecules that serve as energy sources in cells. Mutations in the DPYD gene result in deficiencies (to various degrees) of functional DPD, interfering with the breakdown of uracil and thymine in cells. This results in excessive amounts of uracil and thymine in the blood, urine, and the fluid that surrounds the brain and spinal cord. It is currently poorly understood exactly how this cascade of events causes the signs and symptoms of the condition.
How  Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD) deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that in affected individuals, both copies of the DPYD gene in each cell (one inherited from each parent) have mutations. The mutations that cause DPD deficiency vary widely in severity; therefore, some people with 2 mutated copies of the gene may have signs and symptoms of the condition, while others may be asymptomatic. However, all individuals with 2 mutations are at risk for toxic reactions to fluoropyrimidine drugs. Individuals who carry one mutated copy of the disease-causing gene (including most parents of affected individuals) are referred to as carriers. Carriers typically do not have signs and symptoms of the condition. However, people with one mutated copy of the DPYD gene may still experience toxic reactions to fluoropyrimidine drugs. When 2 carriers for the same autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be a carrier like each parent, and a 25% risk to not have the condition and not be a carrier. A child of one carrier parent has a 50% risk to also be a carrier.
 DPD deficiency may be diagnosed in various ways. In individuals with complete or profound DPD deficiency, laboratory testing can detect elevated levels of uracil and/or thymine in plasma or urine. Partial DPD deficiency is more difficult to detect, which has led to the development of a radioenzymatic test for the DPD enzyme. This test has remained the gold standard for diagnosing DPD deficiency even after the development of genetic testing for the condition, because of the complexity of the DPYD gene and the presence of multiple DNA sequence variations present in most affected individuals. Various types of cells and tissues can be examined this way. More recently, a rapid, noninvasive, and cost-effective breath test was developed. This test permits the evaluation of DPD activity (normal activity and partial or profound deficiency) before the administration of fluoropyrmidine drugs such as 5-FU.
 Currently, no treatment or cure exists for the inborn error of metabolism form of DHD deficiency. Symptoms usually remain the same throughout the person's life.
Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency is a disorder characterized by a wide range of severity, with neurological problems in some individuals and no signs or symptoms in others.  In people with severe dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency, the disorder becomes apparent in infancy. These affected individuals have neurological problems such as recurrent seizures (epilepsy), intellectual disability, a small head size (microcephaly), increased muscle tone (hypertonia), delayed development of motor skills such as walking, and autistic behaviors that affect communication and social interaction. Other affected individuals are asymptomatic, which means they do not have any signs or symptoms of the condition. Individuals with asymptomatic dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency may be identified only by laboratory testing.  People with dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency, including those who otherwise exhibit no symptoms, are vulnerable to severe, potentially life-threatening toxic reactions to certain drugs called fluoropyrimidines that are used to treat cancer. Common examples of these drugs are 5-fluorouracil and capecitabine. These drugs are not broken down efficiently by people with dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency and build up to toxic levels in the body (fluoropyrimidine toxicity). Severe inflammation and ulceration of the lining of the gastrointestinal tract (mucositis) may occur, which can lead to signs and symptoms including mouth sores, abdominal pain, bleeding, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Fluoropyrimidine toxicity may also lead to low numbers of white blood cells (neutropenia), which increases the risk of infections. It can also be associated with low numbers of platelets in the blood (thrombocytopenia), which impairs blood clotting and may lead to abnormal bleeding (hemorrhage). Redness, swelling, numbness, and peeling of the skin on the palms and soles (hand-foot syndrome); shortness of breath; and hair loss may also occur.
Severe dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency, with its early-onset neurological symptoms, is a rare disorder. Its prevalence is unknown. However, between 2 and 8 percent of the general population may be vulnerable to toxic reactions to fluoropyrimidine drugs caused by otherwise asymptomatic dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency.
Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency is caused by mutations in the DPYD gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase, which is involved in the breakdown of molecules called uracil and thymine. Uracil and thymine are pyrimidines, which are one type of nucleotide. Nucleotides are building blocks of DNA, its chemical cousin RNA, and molecules such as ATP and GTP that serve as energy sources in the cell.  Mutations in the DPYD gene result in a lack (deficiency) of functional dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase. Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency interferes with the breakdown of uracil and thymine, and results in excess quantities of these molecules in the blood, urine, and the fluid that surrounds the brain and spinal cord (cerebrospinal fluid). It is unclear how the excess uracil and thymine are related to the specific signs and symptoms of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency. Mutations that result in the absence (complete deficiency) of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase generally lead to more severe signs and symptoms than do mutations that lead to a partial deficiency of this enzyme.  Because fluoropyrimidine drugs are also broken down by the dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase enzyme, deficiency of this enzyme leads to the drug buildup that causes fluoropyrimidine toxicity.
Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. Depending on the severity of these mutations, people with two mutated copies of the DPYD gene in each cell may exhibit the signs and symptoms of this disorder, or they may be generally asymptomatic but at risk for toxic reactions to fluoropyrimidine drugs.  The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. However, people with one mutated copy of the DPYD gene in each cell may still experience toxic reactions to fluoropyrimidine drugs.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care