The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for X-linked intellectual disability, Najm type. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the cerebellum 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Abnormality of the nose 50% Broad forehead 50% Cataract 50% Cerebral cortical atrophy 50% Gait disturbance 50% Hypertelorism 50% Long philtrum 50% Macrotia 50% Microcephaly 50% Myopia 50% Nystagmus 50% Seizures 50% Sensorineural hearing impairment 50% Strabismus 50% Visual impairment 50% Chorioretinal coloboma 7.5% Hypertonia 7.5% Macrogyria 7.5% Neurological speech impairment 7.5% Optic atrophy 7.5% Optic disc pallor 7.5% Optic nerve hypoplasia 7.5% Scoliosis 7.5% Absent speech - Broad nasal tip - Cerebellar hypoplasia - Decreased body weight - Dilated fourth ventricle - Epicanthus - Generalized hypotonia - High palate - Hyperreflexia - Hypohidrosis - Intellectual disability, moderate - Large eyes - Muscle weakness - Muscular hypotonia of the trunk - Oval face - Postnatal growth retardation - Prominent nasal bridge - Short nose - Short stature - Spasticity - Wide nasal bridge - X-linked dominant inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Alpha-thalassemia x-linked intellectual disability (ATRX) syndrome is a genetic condition that causes intellectual disability, muscle weakness (hypotonia), short height, a particular facial appearance, genital abnormalities, and possibly other symptoms.  It is caused by mutations in the ATRX gene and is inherited in an x-linked way.  Treatment includes regular visits to the doctor to monitor growth and intellectual development, early intervention and special education programs, and special formula to help with feeding and nutrition.
How  Alpha-thalassemia x-linked intellectual disability (ATRX) syndrome is caused by a mutation in the ATRX gene and is inherited in an x-linked way.  The chance that a relative may have ATRX syndrome depends on whether the mutation in the first affected family member was inherited from his mother or happened by chance (a de novo mutation).  If the mutation happened by chance, there is very little risk that other relatives could be affected by this condition.  If the mutation was inherited from his mother, each of his mother's sisters has a 50% of being a carrier of ATRX syndrome.  If a woman is a carrier of an ATRX mutation, she has a 25% chance of having a son with the mutation who is affected with ATRX syndrome; a 25% chance of having a son who does not have the mutation and does not have ATRX syndrome; a 25% chance of having a daughter with the mutation who is a carrier of ATRX syndrome; and a 25% chance of having a daughter who does not have the mutation and is not a carrier.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Alopecia intellectual disability syndrome 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Alopecia universalis - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Intellectual disability - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
X-linked intellectual disability, Siderius type is a condition characterized by mild to moderate intellectual disability that affects only males. Affected boys often have delayed development of motor skills such as walking, and their speech may be delayed.  Individuals with X-linked intellectual disability, Siderius type frequently also have an opening in the lip (cleft lip) with an opening in the roof of the mouth (cleft palate). A cleft can occur on one or both sides of the upper lip.  Some boys and men with this condition have distinctive facial features, including a long face, a sloping forehead, a broad nasal bridge, a prominent bone in the lower forehead (supraorbital ridge), and outside corners of the eyes that point upward (upslanting palpebral fissures). Affected individuals may also have low-set ears and large hands.
While X-linked intellectual disability of all types and causes is relatively common, with a prevalence of 1 in 600 to 1,000 males, the prevalence of the Siderius type is unknown. Only a few affected families have been described in the scientific literature.
X-linked intellectual disability, Siderius type is caused by mutations in the PHF8 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is found in the nucleus of cells, particularly in brain cells before and just after birth. The PHF8 protein attaches (binds) to complexes called chromatin to regulate the activity (expression) of other genes. Chromatin is the network of DNA and protein that packages DNA into chromosomes. Binding with the PHF8 protein is part of the process that changes the structure of chromatin (chromatin remodeling) to alter how tightly regions of DNA are packaged. Chromatin remodeling is one way gene expression is regulated; when DNA is tightly packed, gene expression is often lower than when DNA is loosely packed.  Most PHF8 gene mutations lead to an abnormally short protein that gets transported out of the cell's nucleus. Outside of the nucleus, the PHF8 protein cannot interact with chromatin to regulate gene expression. While the exact disease mechanism is unknown, it is likely that a lack of PHF8 protein in the nucleus of brain cells before birth prevents chromatin remodeling, altering the normal expression of genes involved in intellectual function and formation of structures along the midline of the skull. This altered gene expression leads to intellectual disability, cleft lip and palate, and the other features of X-linked intellectual disability, Siderius type.
This condition is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. The gene associated with this condition is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of X-linked intellectual disability, Siderius type:  - Cincinnati Children's Hospital: Cleft Lip / Cleft Palate Bottle Feeding  - Cleveland Clinic: Cleft Lip & Palate Surgery  - Genetic Testing Registry: Siderius X-linked mental retardation syndrome  - Nemours Children's Health System: Cleft Lip and Palate   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
SYNGAP1-related intellectual disability is a neurological disorder characterized by moderate to severe intellectual disability that is evident in early childhood. The earliest features are typically delayed development of speech and motor skills, such as sitting, standing, and walking. Many people with this condition have weak muscle tone (hypotonia), which contributes to the difficulty with motor skills. Some affected individuals lose skills they had already acquired (developmental regression). Other features of SYNGAP1-related intellectual disability include recurrent seizures (epilepsy), hyperactivity, and autism spectrum disorders, which are conditions characterized by impaired communication and social interaction; almost everyone with SYNGAP1-related intellectual disability develops epilepsy, and about half have an autism spectrum disorder.
SYNGAP1-related intellectual disability is a relatively common form of cognitive impairment. It is estimated to account for 1 to 2 percent of intellectual disability cases.
SYNGAP1-related intellectual disability is caused by mutations in the SYNGAP1 gene. The protein produced from this gene, called SynGAP, plays an important role in nerve cells in the brain. It is found at the junctions between nerve cells (synapses) and helps regulate changes in synapses that are critical for learning and memory. Mutations involved in this condition prevent the production of functional SynGAP protein from one copy of the gene, reducing the protein's activity in cells. Studies show that a reduction of SynGAP activity can have multiple effects in nerve cells, including pushing synapses to develop too early. The resulting abnormalities disrupt the synaptic changes in the brain that underlie learning and memory, leading to cognitive impairment and other neurological problems characteristic of SYNGAP1-related intellectual disability.
SYNGAP1-related intellectual disability is classified as an autosomal dominant condition, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Almost all cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. In at least one case, an affected person inherited the mutation from one affected parent.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of SYNGAP1-related intellectual disability:  - Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development: What Are Treatments for Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities?  - Genetic Testing Registry: Mental retardation, autosomal dominant 5   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
The prevalence of CASK-related intellectual disability is unknown. More than 50 females with MICPCH have been described in the medical literature, while only a few affected males have been described.  By contrast, more than 20 males but only a few females have been diagnosed with the milder form of the disorder, XL-ID with or without nystagmus. This form of the disorder may go unrecognized in mildly affected females.
CASK-related intellectual disability, as its name suggests, is caused by mutations in the CASK gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called calcium/calmodulin-dependent serine protein kinase (CASK). The CASK protein is primarily found in nerve cells (neurons) in the brain, where it helps control the activity (expression) of other genes that are involved in brain development. It also helps regulate the movement of chemicals called neurotransmitters and of charged atoms (ions), which are necessary for signaling between neurons. Research suggests that the CASK protein may also interact with the protein produced from another gene, FRMD7, to promote development of the nerves that control eye movement (the oculomotor neural network).  Mutations in the CASK gene affect the role of the CASK protein in brain development and function, resulting in the signs and symptoms of CASK-related intellectual disability. The severe form of this disorder, MICPCH, is caused by mutations that eliminate CASK function, while mutations that impair the function of this protein cause the milder form, XL-ID with or without nystagmus. Affected individuals with nystagmus may have CASK gene mutations that disrupt the interaction between the CASK protein and the protein produced from the FRMD7 gene, leading to problems with the development of the oculomotor neural network and resulting in abnormal eye movements.
This condition is inherited in an X-linked pattern. A condition is considered X-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes in each cell. In females, who have two copies of the X chromosome, one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In males, who have only one X chromosome, a mutation in the only copy of the gene in each cell causes the condition. In most cases, males experience more severe symptoms of the disorder than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of CASK-related intellectual disability:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: CASK-Related Disorders  - Genetic Testing Registry: Mental retardation and microcephaly with pontine and cerebellar hypoplasia   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care