Genes are the building blocks of heredity. They are passed from parent to child. They hold DNA, the instructions for making proteins. Proteins do most of the work in cells. They move molecules from one place to another, build structures, break down toxins, and do many other maintenance jobs.    Sometimes there is a mutation, a change in a gene or genes. The mutation changes the gene's instructions for making a protein, so the protein does not work properly or is missing entirely. This can cause a medical condition called a genetic disorder.    You can inherit a gene mutation from one or both parents. A mutation can also happen during your lifetime.    There are three types of genetic disorders:       - Single-gene disorders, where a mutation affects one gene. Sickle cell anemia is an example.    - Chromosomal disorders, where chromosomes (or parts of chromosomes) are missing or changed. Chromosomes are the structures that hold our genes. Down syndrome is a chromosomal disorder.    - Complex disorders, where there are mutations in two or more genes. Often your lifestyle and environment also play a role. Colon cancer is an example.       Genetic tests on blood and other tissue can identify genetic disorders.    NIH: National Library of Medicine
A genetic brain disorder is caused by a variation or a mutation in a gene. A variation is a different form of a gene. A mutation is a change in a gene. Genetic brain disorders affect the development and function of the brain.    Some genetic brain disorders are due to random gene mutations or mutations caused by environmental exposure, such as cigarette smoke. Other disorders are inherited, which means that a mutated gene or group of genes is passed down through a family. They can also be due to a combination of both genetic changes and other outside factors.    Some examples of genetic brain disorders include       - Leukodystrophies    - Phenylketonuria    - Tay-Sachs disease    - Wilson disease       Many people with genetic brain disorders fail to produce enough of certain proteins that influence brain development and function. These brain disorders can cause serious problems that affect the nervous system. Some have treatments to control symptoms. Some are life-threatening.
Mitochondrial genetic disorders refer to a group of conditions that affect the mitochondria (the structures in each cell of the body that are responsible for making energy). People with these conditions can present at any age with almost any affected body system; however, the brain, muscles, heart, liver, nerves, eyes, ears and kidneys are the organs and tissues most commonly affected. Symptom severity can also vary widely. Mitochondrial genetic disorders can be caused by changes (mutations) in either the mitochondrial DNA or nuclear DNA that lead to dysfunction of the mitochondria and inadequate production of energy. Those caused by mutations in mitochondrial DNA are transmitted by maternal inheritance, while those caused by mutations in nuclear DNA may follow an autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-linked pattern of inheritance. Treatment varies based on the specific type of condition and the signs and symptoms present in each person.
 People with mitochondrial genetic disorders can present at any age with almost any affected body system. While some conditions may only affect a single organ, many involve multiple organ systems including the brain, muscles, heart, liver, nerves, eyes, ears and/or kidneys. Symptom severity can also vary widely. The most common signs and symptoms include: Poor growth Loss of muscle coordination Muscle weakness Seizures Autism Problems with vision and/or hearing Developmental delay Learning disabilities Heart, liver, and/or kidney disease Gastrointestinal disorders Diabetes Increased risk of infection Thyroid and/or adrenal abnormalities Autonomic dysfunction Dementia The United Mitochondrial Disease Foundation's website features a comprehensive list of possible symptoms (click here to see this information) and symptoms categorized by type of mitochondrial genetic disorder (click here to access this page).
 Mitochondrial genetic disorders can be caused by changes (mutations) in either the mitochondrial DNA or nuclear DNA that lead to dysfunction of the mitochondria. Most DNA (hereditary material that is passed from parent to child) is packaged within the nucleus of each cell (known as nuclear DNA). However, mitochondria (the structures in each cell that produce energy) contain a small amount of their own DNA, which is known as mitochondrial DNA. When the mitochondria are not working properly, the body does not have enough energy to carry out its normal functions. This can lead to the variety of health problems associated with mitochondrial genetic disorders.
 Unfortunately, mitochondrial genetic disorders can be difficult to diagnose, and many affected people may never receive a specific diagnosis. They are often suspected in people who have a condition that effects multiple, unrelated systems of the body. In some cases, the pattern of symptoms may be suggestive of a specific mitochondrial condition. If the disease-causing gene(s) associated with the particular condition is known, the diagnosis can then be confirmed with genetic testing. If a mitochondrial genetic disorder is suspected but the signs and symptoms do not suggest a specific diagnosis, a more extensive work-up may be required. In these cases, a physician may start by evaluating the levels of certain substances in a sample of blood or cerebrospinal fluid. Other tests that can support a diagnosis include: Exercise testing Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (detects abnormalities in the brain's chemical makeup) Imaging studies of the brain such as MRI or CT scan Electroencephalography (EEG) Tests that evaluate the heart including electrocardiography and echocardiography Muscle biopsy When possible, confirming a diagnosis with genetic testing can have important implications for family members. Identifying the disease-causing gene(s) will give the family information about the inheritance pattern and the risk to other family members. It will also allow other at-risk family members to undergo genetic testing. For more information regarding the diagnosis of mitochondrial genetic disorders, please visit the United Mitochondrial Disease Foundation's "Getting a Diagnosis" Web page. GeneReviews also provides information on establishing a diagnosis of a mitochondrial disorder. Click on the link to view the article on this topic.
 Treatment for mitochondrial genetic disorders varies significantly based on the specific type of condition and the signs and symptoms present in each person. The primary aim of treatment is to alleviate symptoms and slow the progression of the condition. For example, a variety of vitamins and other supplements have been used to treat people affected by mitochondrial conditions with varying degrees of success. Other examples of possible interventions include medications to treat diabetes mellitus, surgery for cataracts, and cochlear implantation for hearing loss. For more general information about the treatment of mitochondrial genetic disorders, please visit GeneReviews.