Your pleura is a large, thin sheet of tissue that wraps around the outside of your lungs and lines the inside of your chest cavity. Between the layers of the pleura is a very thin space. Normally it's filled with a small amount of fluid. The fluid helps the two layers of the pleura glide smoothly past each other as your lungs breathe air in and out.    Disorders of the pleura include       - Pleurisy - inflammation of the pleura that causes sharp pain with breathing    - Pleural effusion - excess fluid in the pleural space    - Pneumothorax - buildup of air or gas in the pleural space    - Hemothorax - buildup of blood in the pleural space       Many different conditions can cause pleural problems. Viral infection is the most common cause of pleurisy. The most common cause of pleural effusion is congestive heart failure. Lung diseases, like COPD, tuberculosis, and acute lung injury, cause pneumothorax. Injury to the chest is the most common cause of hemothorax. Treatment focuses on removing fluid, air, or blood from the pleural space, relieving symptoms, and treating the underlying condition.    NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
Pleurisy
                
Many conditions can cause pleurisy. Viral infections are likely the most common cause. Other causes of pleurisy include:
                
Bacterial infections, such as pneumonia (nu-MO-ne-ah) and tuberculosis, and infections from fungi or parasites
                
Pulmonary embolism, a blood clot that travels through the blood vessels to the lungs
                
Autoimmune disorders, such as lupus and rheumatoid arthritis
                
Cancer, such as lung cancer, lymphoma, and mesothelioma (MEZ-o-thee-lee-O-ma)
                
Chest and heart surgery, especially coronary artery bypass grafting
                
Lung diseases, such as LAM (lymphangioleiomyomatosis) or asbestosis (as-bes-TO-sis)
                
Inflammatory bowel disease
                
Familial Mediterranean fever, an inherited condition that often causes fever and swelling in the abdomen or lungs
                
Other causes of pleurisy include chest injuries, pancreatitis (an inflamed pancreas), and reactions to certain medicines. Reactions to certain medicines can cause a condition similar to lupus. These medicines include procainamide, hydralazine, and isoniazid.
                
Sometimes doctors can't find the cause of pleurisy.
                
Pneumothorax
                
Lung diseases or acute lung injury can make it more likely that you will develop a pneumothorax (a buildup of air or gas in the pleural space). Such lung diseases may include COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), tuberculosis, and LAM.
                
Surgery or a chest injury also may cause a pneumothorax.
                
You can develop a pneumothorax without having a recognized lung disease or chest injury. This is called a spontaneous pneumothorax. Smoking increases your risk of spontaneous pneumothorax. Having a family history of the condition also increases your risk.
                
Pleural Effusion
                
The most common cause of a pleural effusion (a buildup of fluid in the pleural space) is heart failure. Lung cancer, LAM, pneumonia, tuberculosis, and other lung infections also can lead to a pleural effusion.
                
Sometimes kidney or liver disease can cause fluid to build up in the pleural space. Asbestosis, sarcoidosis (sar-koy-DO-sis), and reactions to some medicines also can lead to a pleural effusion.
                
Hemothorax
                
An injury to the chest, chest or heart surgery, or lung or pleural cancer can cause a hemothorax (buildup of blood in the pleural space).
                
A hemothorax also can be a complication of an infection (for example, pneumonia), tuberculosis, or a spontaneous pneumothorax.
Pleurisy
                
The main symptom of pleurisy is a sharp or stabbing pain in your chest that gets worse when you breathe in deeply or cough or sneeze.
                
The pain may stay in one place or it may spread to your shoulders or back. Sometimes the pain becomes a fairly constant dull ache.
                
Depending on what's causing the pleurisy, you may have other symptoms, such as:
                
Shortness of breath or rapid, shallow breathing
                
Coughing
                
Fever and chills
                
Unexplained weight loss
                
Pneumothorax
                
The symptoms of pneumothorax include:
                
Sudden, sharp chest pain that gets worse when you breathe in deeply or cough
                
Shortness of breath
                
Chest tightness
                
Easy fatigue (tiredness)
                
A rapid heart rate
                
A bluish tint to the skin caused by lack of oxygen
                
Other symptoms of pneumothorax include flaring of the nostrils; anxiety, stress, and tension; and hypotension (low blood pressure).
                
Pleural Effusion
                
Pleural effusion often has no symptoms.
                
Hemothorax
                
The symptoms of hemothorax often are similar to those of pneumothorax. They include:
                
Chest pain
                
Shortness of breath
                
Respiratory failure
                
A rapid heart rate
                
Anxiety
                
Restlessness