Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is a life-threatening lung condition that prevents enough oxygen from getting to the lungs and into the blood.  People who develop ARDS often are very ill with another disease or have major injuries. The condition leads to a buildup of fluid in the air sacs which prevents enough oxygen from passing into the bloodstream. Symptoms may include difficulty breathing, low blood pressure and organ failure, rapid breathing and shortness of breath.
 Typically people with ARDS need to be in an intensive care unit (ICU). The goal of treatment is to provide breathing support and treat the cause of ARDS. This may involve medications to treat infections, reduce inflammation, and remove fluid from the lungs. A breathing machine is used to deliver high doses of oxygen and continued pressure called PEEP (positive end-expiratory pressure) to the damaged lungs. Patients often need to be deeply sedated with medications when using this equipment. Some research suggests that giving medications to temporarily paralyze a person with ARDS will increase the chance of recovery. Treatment continues until the patient is well enough to breathe on his/her own. More detailed information about the treatment of ARDS can be accessed through the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI) and Medscape Reference.  An article detailing Oxygen Therapy is also available.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Camptodactyly of finger - Constipation - Decreased fetal movement - Decreased nerve conduction velocity - Degeneration of anterior horn cells - Denervation of the diaphragm - Diaphragmatic eventration - Diaphragmatic paralysis - Distal amyotrophy - Distal muscle weakness - EMG: neuropathic changes - Failure to thrive - Hyperhidrosis - Hyporeflexia - Inspiratory stridor - Intrauterine growth retardation - Limb muscle weakness - Peripheral axonal degeneration - Premature birth - Respiratory failure - Small for gestational age - Spinal muscular atrophy - Tachypnea - Talipes equinovarus - Urinary incontinence - Ventilator dependence with inability to wean - Weak cry - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) is a breathing disorder that affects newborns. RDS rarely occurs in full-term infants. The disorder is more common in premature infants born about 6 weeks or more before their due dates.
                
RDS is more common in premature infants because their lungs aren't able to make enough surfactant (sur-FAK-tant). Surfactant is a liquid that coats the inside of the lungs. It helps keep them open so that infants can breathe in air once they're born.
                
Without enough surfactant, the lungs collapse and the infant has to work hard to breathe. He or she might not be able to breathe in enough oxygen to support the body's organs. The lack of oxygen can damage the baby's brain and other organs if proper treatment isn't given.
                
Most babies who develop RDS show signs of breathing problems and a lack of oxygen at birth or within the first few hours that follow.
                
Overview
                
RDS is a common lung disorder in premature infants. In fact, nearly all infants born before 28 weeks of pregnancy develop RDS.
                
RDS might be an early phase of bronchopulmonary dysplasia (brong-ko-PUL-mo-nar-e dis-PLA-ze-ah), or BPD. This is another breathing disorder that affects premature babies.
                
RDS usually develops in the first 24 hours after birth. If premature infants still have breathing problems by the time they reach their original due dates, they may be diagnosed with BPD. Some of the life-saving treatments used for RDS may cause BPD.
                
Some infants who have RDS recover and never get BPD. Infants who do get BPD have lungs that are less developed or more damaged than the infants who recover.
                
Infants who develop BPD usually have fewer healthy air sacs and tiny blood vessels in their lungs. Both the air sacs and the tiny blood vessels that support them are needed to breathe well.
                
Outlook
                
Due to improved treatments and medical advances, most infants who have RDS survive. However, these babies may need extra medical care after going home.
                
Some babies have complications from RDS or its treatments. Serious complications include chronic (ongoing) breathing problems, such as asthma and BPD; blindness; and brain damage.
The main cause of respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) is a lack of surfactant in the lungs. Surfactant is a liquid that coats the inside of the lungs.
                
A fetus's lungs start making surfactant during the third trimester of pregnancy (weeks 26 through labor and delivery). The substance coats the insides of the air sacs in the lungs. This helps keep the lungs open so breathing can occur after birth.
                
Without enough surfactant, the lungs will likely collapse when the infant exhales (breathes out). The infant then has to work harder to breathe. He or she might not be able to get enough oxygen to support the body's organs.
                
Some full-term infants develop RDS because they have faulty genes that affect how their bodies make surfactant.
Certain factors may increase the risk that your infant will have respiratory distress syndrome (RDS). These factors include:
                
Premature delivery. The earlier your baby is born, the greater his or her risk for RDS. Most cases of RDS occur in babies born before 28 weeks of pregnancy.
                
Stress during your baby's delivery, especially if you lose a lot of blood.
                
Infection.
                
Your having diabetes.
                
Your baby also is at greater risk for RDS if you require an emergency cesarean delivery (C-section) before your baby is full term. You may need an emergency C-section because of a condition, such as a detached placenta, that puts you or your infant at risk.
                
Planned C-sections that occur before a baby's lungs have fully matured also can increase the risk of RDS. Your doctor can do tests before delivery that show whether it's likely that your baby's lungs are fully developed. These tests assess the age of the fetus or lung maturity.
Signs and symptoms of respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) usually occur at birth or within the first few hours that follow. They include:
                
Rapid, shallow breathing
                
Sharp pulling in of the chest below and between the ribs with each breath
                
Grunting sounds
                
Flaring of the nostrils
                
The infant also may have pauses in breathing that last for a few seconds. This condition is called apnea (AP-ne-ah).
                
Respiratory Distress Syndrome Complications
                
Depending on the severity of an infant's RDS, he or she may develop other medical problems.
                
Lung Complications
                
Lung complications may include a collapsed lung (atelectasis), leakage of air from the lung into the chest cavity (pneumothorax), and bleeding in the lung (hemorrhage).
                
Some of the life-saving treatments used for RDS may cause bronchopulmonary dysplasia, another breathing disorder.
                
Blood and Blood Vessel Complications
                
Infants who have RDS may develop sepsis, an infection of the bloodstream. This infection can be life threatening.
                
Lack of oxygen may prevent a fetal blood vessel called the ductus arteriosus from closing after birth as it should. This condition is called patent ductus arteriosus, or PDA.
                
The ductus arteriosus connects a lung artery to a heart artery. If it remains open, it can strain the heart and increase blood pressure in the lung arteries.
                
Other Complications
                
Complications of RDS also may include blindness and other eye problems and a bowel disease called necrotizing enterocolitis (EN-ter-o-ko-LI-tis). Infants who have severe RDS can develop kidney failure.
                
Some infants who have RDS develop bleeding in the brain. This bleeding can delay mental development. It also can cause mental retardation or cerebral palsy.
Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) is common in premature infants. Thus, doctors usually recognize and begin treating the disorder as soon as babies are born.
                
Doctors also do several tests to rule out other conditions that could be causing an infant's breathing problems. The tests also can confirm that the doctors have diagnosed the condition correctly.
                
The tests include:
                
Chest x ray. A chest x ray creates a of the structures inside the chest, such as the heart and lungs. This test can show whether your infant has signs of RDS. A chest x ray also can detect problems, such as a collapsed lung, that may require urgent treatment.
                
Blood tests. Blood tests are used to see whether an infant has enough oxygen in his or her blood. Blood tests also can help find out whether an infection is causing the infant's breathing problems.
                
Echocardiography (echo). This test uses sound waves to create a moving picture of the heart. Echo is used to rule out heart defects as the cause of an infant's breathing problems.
Taking steps to ensure a healthy pregnancy might prevent your infant from being born before his or her lungs have fully developed. These steps include:
                
Seeing your doctor regularly during your pregnancy
                
Following a healthy diet
                
Avoiding tobacco smoke, alcohol, and illegal drugs
                
Managing any medical conditions you have
                
Preventing infections
                
If you're having a planned cesarean delivery (C-section), your doctor can do tests before delivery to show whether it's likely that your baby's lungs are fully developed. These tests assess the age of the fetus or lung maturity.
                
Your doctor may give you injections of a corticosteroid medicine if he or she thinks you may give birth too early. This medicine can speed up surfactant production and development of the lungs, brain, and kidneys in your baby.
                
Treatment with corticosteroids can reduce your baby's risk of respiratory distress syndrome (RDS). If the baby does develop RDS, it will probably be fairly mild.
                
Corticosteroid treatment also can reduce the chances that your baby will have bleeding in the brain.
Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1 (SMARD1) is an inherited condition that causes muscle weakness and respiratory failure typically beginning in infancy. Early features of this condition are difficult and noisy breathing, especially when inhaling; a weak cry; problems feeding; and recurrent episodes of pneumonia. Typically between the ages of 6 weeks and 6 months, infants with this condition will experience a sudden inability to breathe due to paralysis of the muscle that separates the abdomen from the chest cavity (the diaphragm). Normally, the diaphragm contracts and moves downward during inhalation to allow the lungs to expand. With diaphragm paralysis, affected individuals require life-long support with a machine to help them breathe (mechanical ventilation). Rarely, children with SMARD1 develop signs or symptoms of the disorder later in childhood.  Soon after respiratory failure occurs, individuals with SMARD1 develop muscle weakness in their distal muscles. These are the muscles farther from the center of the body, such as muscles in the hands and feet. The weakness soon spreads to all muscles; however, within 2 years, the muscle weakness typically stops getting worse. Some individuals may retain a low level of muscle function, while others lose all ability to move their muscles. Muscle weakness severely impairs motor development, such as sitting, standing, and walking. Some affected children develop an abnormal side-to-side and back-to-front curvature of the spine (scoliosis and kyphosis, often called kyphoscoliosis when they occur together). After approximately the first year of life, individuals with SMARD1 may lose their deep tendon reflexes, such as the reflex being tested when a doctor taps the knee with a hammer.  Other features of SMARD1 can include reduced pain sensitivity, excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis), loss of bladder and bowel control, and an irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia).
SMARD1 appears to be a rare condition, but its prevalence is unknown. More than 60 cases have been reported in the scientific literature.
Mutations in the IGHMBP2 gene cause SMARD1. The IGHMBP2 gene provides instructions for making a protein involved in copying (replicating) DNA; producing RNA, a chemical cousin of DNA; and producing proteins. IGHMBP2 gene mutations that cause SMARD1 lead to the production of a protein with reduced ability to aid in DNA replication and the production of RNA and proteins. These problems particularly affect alpha-motor neurons, which are specialized cells in the brainstem and spinal cord that control muscle movements. Although the mechanism is unknown, altered IGHMBP2 proteins contribute to the damage of these neurons and their death over time. The cumulative death of alpha-motor neurons leads to breathing problems and progressive muscle weakness in children with SMARD1.  Research suggests that the amount of functional protein that is produced from the mutated IGHMBP2 gene may play a role in the severity of SMARD1. Individuals who have some functional protein are more likely to develop signs and symptoms later in childhood and retain a greater level of muscle function.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of SMARD1:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress 1   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care