Adiposis dolorosa is a rare condition characterized by the growth of multiple, painful, lipomas (benign, fatty tumors). The lipomas may occur anywhere on the body and can cause severe pain. Other symptoms may include weakness, fatigability, and mental disturbances. It usually occurs in obese, post-menopausal women, but it can also occur in men. Adiposa dolorosa is chronic and tends to be progressive. The exact cause is unknown. Most cases are sporadic (not inherited) but a few familial cases with autosomal dominant inheritance have been reported. Treatment may include weight reduction; surgical removal or liposuction of lipomas; and pain management.
 The exact cause of adiposis dolorosa remains unknown. While possible causes have been suggested, none have been confirmed. These include long-term treatment with high-dose corticosteroids; endocrine system abnormalities; and changes in fatty acid or carbohydrate metabolism. Researchers have also suggested that it could be an autoimmune disorder. Because the condition has rarely occurred in more than one person within a family, it may have a genetic component. However, no specific gene known to be associated with the condition has been identified. It is unknown why adiposis dolorosa usually occurs in people who are overweight or obese, or why the signs and symptoms do not appear until mid-adulthood.
 Most cases of adiposis dolorosa are sporadic (not inherited). This means that it usually occurs in people with no family history of the condition. Adiposis dolorosa has rarely been reported to occur in more than one family member. In some of these cases, it appears to have been inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. In these cases, when an affected person has children, each child has a 50% (1 in 2) risk to inherit the gene causing the condition. However, no associated genes have been identified.
 Clinical genetic testing for adiposis dolorosa is currently not available. This type of testing is typically only available when a genetic cause for a condition has been established, and the specific gene(s) causing the condition have been identified. Most cases of adiposis dolorosa are sporadic (not inherited) and no genes known to be associated with the condition have been identified. We are also not aware of laboratories currently offering research genetic testing for this condition.
 Management of adiposis dolorosa is difficult and no currently available treatments have led to long-lasting, complete pain reduction. Weight reduction, surgical removal of particularly burdensome lesions, and/or liposuction may be helpful for some people. There is currently no drug known to change the course of the disease. Available treatments mainly focus on alleviating symptoms and may include: prednisone or intravenous lidocaine for pain traditional pain medicines such nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (which are often inefficient), or acetaminophen combined with an opioid analgesic a cortisone/anesthetic injection for localized pain diuretics for swelling of the fingers Other treatments that have led to some pain reduction in some affected people include methotrexate and infliximab; interferon -2b; calcium-channel modulators; and rapid cycling hypobaric pressure. Adjunctive therapies may include acupuncture, cognitive behavioral therapy, hypnosis, and biofeedback.
Adiposis dolorosa is a condition characterized by painful folds of fatty (adipose) tissue or the growth of multiple noncancerous (benign) fatty tumors called lipomas. This condition occurs most often in women who are overweight or obese, and signs and symptoms typically appear between ages 35 and 50.  In people with adiposis dolorosa, abnormal fatty tissue or lipomas can occur anywhere on the body but are most often found on the torso, buttocks, and upper parts of the arms and legs. Lipomas usually feel like firm bumps (nodules) under the skin. The growths cause burning or aching that can be severe. In some people, the pain comes and goes, while in others it is continuous. Movement or pressure on adipose tissue or lipomas can make the pain worse.  Other signs and symptoms that have been reported to occur with adiposis dolorosa include general weakness and tiredness (fatigue), depression, irritability, confusion, recurrent seizures (epilepsy), and a progressive decline in intellectual function (dementia). These problems do not occur in everyone with adiposis dolorosa, and it is unclear whether they are directly related to the condition.
Adiposis dolorosa is a rare condition whose prevalence is unknown. For reasons that are unclear, it occurs up to 30 times more often in women than in men.
The cause of adiposis dolorosa is unknown. The condition is thought to have a genetic component because a few families with multiple affected family members have been reported. However, no associated genes have been identified.  Several other possible causes of adiposis dolorosa have been suggested, although none have been confirmed. They include the use of medications called corticosteroids, dysfunction of the endocrine system (which produces hormones), or changes in the deposition and breakdown of fat (adipose tissue metabolism). Researchers have also suggested that adiposis dolorosa could be an autoimmune disorder, which occurs when the immune system malfunctions and attacks the body's own tissues and organs. However, there is no firm evidence that the condition is related to abnormal inflammation or other immune system malfunction.  It is unknown why adiposis dolorosa usually occurs in people who are overweight or obese, or why the signs and symptoms do not appear until mid-adulthood.
Most cases of adiposis dolorosa are sporadic, which means they occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.  A small number of familial cases of adiposis dolorosa have been reported. When the condition runs in families, it appears to have an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance because affected individuals inherit the condition from one affected parent. This pattern of inheritance suggests that one copy of an altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of adiposis dolorosa:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Lipomatosis dolorosa  - Merck Manual Consumer Version: Lipomas   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care