Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Autosomal dominant intermediate Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type D. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Areflexia - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Axonal degeneration/regeneration - Distal amyotrophy - Distal muscle weakness - Distal sensory impairment - Hyporeflexia - Segmental peripheral demyelination/remyelination - Upper limb muscle weakness - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Deafness, autosomal dominant nonsyndromic sensorineural 23. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Conductive hearing impairment 75% Preauricular pit 5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Sensorineural hearing impairment - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Autosomal dominant intermediate Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type F. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Axonal regeneration - Distal sensory impairment - Hammertoe - Hyporeflexia - Onion bulb formation - Pes cavus - Slow progression - Steppage gait - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Autosomal dominant intermediate Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type A. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Areflexia - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Axonal degeneration/regeneration - Distal sensory impairment - Foot dorsiflexor weakness - Hyporeflexia - Muscle cramps - Onion bulb formation - Onset - Pes cavus - Segmental peripheral demyelination - Segmental peripheral demyelination/remyelination - Steppage gait - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Autosomal dominant intermediate Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type C. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the foot - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Axonal regeneration - Distal amyotrophy - Distal muscle weakness - Distal sensory impairment - Upper limb muscle weakness - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Autosomal dominant intermediate Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type B. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Segmental peripheral demyelination 5% Areflexia - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Axonal degeneration - Decreased number of peripheral myelinated nerve fibers - Distal sensory impairment - Hyporeflexia - Juvenile onset - Onion bulb formation - Pes cavus - Segmental peripheral demyelination/remyelination - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Autosomal dominant deafness-onychodystrophy syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Conical tooth 7.5% Selective tooth agenesis 7.5% Triphalangeal thumb 5% Anonychia - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Brachydactyly syndrome - Congenital onset - Hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia - Nail dystrophy - Sensorineural hearing impairment - Small nail - Toe syndactyly - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Deafness, autosomal dominant nonsyndromic sensorineural 17. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - High-frequency hearing impairment - Juvenile onset - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hypocalcemia, autosomal dominant. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Behavioral abnormality 90% EMG abnormality 90% Flexion contracture 90% Hypercalciuria 90% Hypocalcemia 90% Involuntary movements 90% Paresthesia 90% Abdominal pain 50% Abnormal pattern of respiration 50% Abnormality of the fingernails 50% Alopecia 50% Arrhythmia 50% Dry skin 50% Hyperphosphatemia 50% Hypotension 50% Nephrolithiasis 50% Congestive heart failure 7.5% Eczema 7.5% Increased intracranial pressure 7.5% Irregular hyperpigmentation 7.5% Optic atrophy 7.5% Reduced bone mineral density 7.5% Reduced consciousness/confusion 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Autosomal dominant intermediate Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type E. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Stage 5 chronic kidney disease 5% Areflexia - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Axonal loss - Distal lower limb amyotrophy - Distal muscle weakness - Distal sensory impairment - Distal upper limb amyotrophy - Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis - Foot dorsiflexor weakness - Hammertoe - Hyporeflexia - Onion bulb formation - Pes cavus - Progressive - Proteinuria - Split hand - Steppage gait - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE) is an uncommon, inherited form of epilepsy. Signs and symptoms include seizures that usually occur at night during sleep. The seizures that occur in people with ADNFLE can last from a few seconds to a few minutes, and can vary from causing simple arousal from sleep to severe, dramatic muscle spasm events. Some people with ADNFLE also have seizures during the day. Some episodes may be misdiagnosed as nightmares, night terrors, or panic attacks. The onset of ADNFLE ranges from infancy to adulthood, but most cases begin in childhood. Episodes tend to become milder and less frequent with age. ADNFLE is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner and may be caused by a mutation in any of several genes. In many cases, the genetic cause remains unknown. Seizures can usually be controlled with antiseizure medications.
 The diagnosis of autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE) is made on clinical grounds. The key to diagnosis is a detailed history from the affected person, as well as witnesses. Sometimes video-EEG monitoring is necessary. The features that are suggestive of a diagnosis of ADNFLE are: clusters of seizures with a frontal semiology seizures that occur predominantly during sleep normal clinical neurologic exam normal intellect (although reduced intellect, cognitive deficits, or psychiatric disorders may occur) normal findings on neuroimaging ictal EEG (recorded during a seizure) that may be normal or obscured by movement of the cables or electrodes interictal EEG (recorded in between seizures) that shows infrequent epileptiform discharges (distinctive patterns resembling those that occur in people with epilepsy) the presence of the same disorder in other family members, with evidence of autosomal dominant inheritance The diagnosis can be established in a person with the above features, combined with a positive family history and/or genetic testing that detects a mutation in one of the genes known to cause ADNFLE. People who are concerned they may be having seizures or other neurological signs or symptoms should be evaluated by a neurologist.
Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Deafness, autosomal dominant nonsyndromic sensorineural 22. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Sensorineural hearing impairment - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Autosomal dominant compelling helio ophthalmic outburst syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the nervous system - Autosomal dominant inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Autosomal dominant partial epilepsy with auditory features (ADPEAF) is a rare form of epilepsy, a condition that is characterized by recurrent seizures. In ADPEAF, specifically, most affected people experience secondary generalized seizures and partial seizures, some of which are associated with sound-related symptoms (such as buzzing, humming, or ringing) and/or receptive aphasia (inability to understand written or spoken words). Less commonly, seizures may cause visual hallucinations, a disturbance in the sense of smell, vertigo, or other symptoms affecting the senses. Signs and symptoms of the condition generally begin in adolescence or early adulthood. ADPEAF is caused by changes (mutations) in the LGI1 or RELN gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. The seizures associated with ADPEAF are typically well controlled with medications that are used to treat epilepsy (called antiepileptic drugs).
Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Autosomal dominant partial epilepsy with auditory features. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Auditory auras - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Bilateral convulsive seizures - Focal seizures with impairment of consciousness or awareness - Focal seizures without impairment of consciousness or awareness - Incomplete penetrance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Autosomal dominant hypocalcemia is characterized by low levels of calcium in the blood (hypocalcemia). Affected individuals can have an imbalance of other molecules in the blood as well, including too much phosphate (hyperphosphatemia) or too little magnesium (hypomagnesemia). Some people with autosomal dominant hypocalcemia also have low levels of a hormone called parathyroid hormone (hypoparathyroidism). This hormone is involved in the regulation of calcium levels in the blood. Abnormal levels of calcium and other molecules in the body can lead to a variety of signs and symptoms, although about half of affected individuals have no associated health problems.  The most common features of autosomal dominant hypocalcemia include muscle spasms in the hands and feet (carpopedal spasms) and muscle cramping, prickling or tingling sensations (paresthesias), or twitching of the nerves and muscles (neuromuscular irritability) in various parts of the body. More severely affected individuals develop seizures, usually in infancy or childhood. Sometimes, these symptoms occur only during episodes of illness or fever.  Some people with autosomal dominant hypocalcemia have high levels of calcium in their urine (hypercalciuria), which can lead to deposits of calcium in the kidneys (nephrocalcinosis) or the formation of kidney stones (nephrolithiasis). These conditions can damage the kidneys and impair their function. Sometimes, abnormal deposits of calcium form in the brain, typically in structures called basal ganglia, which help control movement.  A small percentage of severely affected individuals have features of a kidney disorder called Bartter syndrome in addition to hypocalcemia. These features can include a shortage of potassium (hypokalemia) and magnesium and a buildup of the hormone aldosterone (hyperaldosteronism) in the blood. The abnormal balance of molecules can raise the pH of the blood, which is known as metabolic alkalosis. The combination of features of these two conditions is sometimes referred to as autosomal dominant hypocalcemia with Bartter syndrome or Bartter syndrome type V.  There are two types of autosomal dominant hypocalcemia distinguished by their genetic cause. The signs and symptoms of the two types are generally the same.
The prevalence of autosomal dominant hypocalcemia is unknown. The condition is likely underdiagnosed because it often causes no signs or symptoms.
Autosomal dominant hypocalcemia is primarily caused by mutations in the CASR gene; these cases are known as type 1. A small percentage of cases, known as type 2, are caused by mutations in the GNA11 gene. The proteins produced from these genes work together to regulate the amount of calcium in the blood.  The CASR gene provides instructions for making a protein called the calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR). Calcium molecules attach (bind) to the CaSR protein, which allows this protein to monitor and regulate the amount of calcium in the blood. G11, which is produced from the GNA11 gene, is one component of a signaling protein that works in conjunction with CaSR. When a certain concentration of calcium is reached, CaSR stimulates G11 to send signals to block processes that increase the amount of calcium in the blood.  Mutations in the CASR or GNA11 gene lead to overactivity of the respective protein. The altered CaSR protein is more sensitive to calcium, meaning even low levels of calcium can trigger it to stimulate G11 signaling. Similarly, the altered G11 protein continues to send signals to prevent calcium increases, even when levels in the blood are very low. As a result, calcium levels in the blood remain low, causing hypocalcemia. Calcium plays an important role in the control of muscle movement, and a shortage of this molecule can lead to cramping or twitching of the muscles. Impairment of the processes that increase calcium can also disrupt the normal regulation of other molecules, such as phosphate and magnesium, leading to other signs of autosomal dominant hypocalcemia. Studies show that the lower the amount of calcium in the blood, the more severe the symptoms of the condition are.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  In most cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. A small number of cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of autosomal dominant hypocalcemia:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Autosomal dominant hypocalcemia   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE) is an uncommon form of epilepsy that runs in families. This disorder causes seizures that usually occur at night (nocturnally) while an affected person is sleeping. Some people with ADNFLE also have seizures during the day.  The seizures characteristic of ADNFLE tend to occur in clusters, with each one lasting from a few seconds to a few minutes. Some people have mild seizures that simply cause them to wake up from sleep. Others have more severe episodes that can include sudden, repetitive movements such as flinging or throwing motions of the arms and bicycling movements of the legs. The person may get out of bed and wander around, which can be mistaken for sleepwalking. The person may also cry out or make moaning, gasping, or grunting sounds. These episodes are sometimes misdiagnosed as nightmares, night terrors, or panic attacks.  In some types of epilepsy, including ADNFLE, a pattern of neurological symptoms called an aura often precedes a seizure. The most common symptoms associated with an aura in people with ADNFLE are tingling, shivering, a sense of fear, dizziness (vertigo), and a feeling of falling or being pushed. Some affected people have also reported a feeling of breathlessness, overly fast breathing (hyperventilation), or choking. It is unclear what brings on seizures in people with ADNFLE. Episodes may be triggered by stress or fatigue, but in most cases the seizures do not have any recognized triggers.  The seizures associated with ADNFLE can begin anytime from infancy to mid-adulthood, but most begin in childhood. The episodes tend to become milder and less frequent with age. In most affected people, the seizures can be effectively controlled with medication.  Most people with ADNFLE are intellectually normal, and there are no problems with their brain function between seizures. However, some people with ADNFLE have experienced psychiatric disorders (such as schizophrenia), behavioral problems, or intellectual disability. It is unclear whether these additional features are directly related to epilepsy in these individuals.
ADNFLE appears to be an uncommon form of epilepsy; its prevalence is unknown. This condition has been reported in more than 100 families worldwide.
Mutations in the CHRNA2, CHRNA4, and CHRNB2 genes can cause ADNFLE. These genes provide instructions for making different parts (subunits) of a larger molecule called a neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR). This receptor plays an important role in chemical signaling between nerve cells (neurons) in the brain.  Communication between neurons depends on chemicals called neurotransmitters, which are released from one neuron and taken up by neighboring neurons. Researchers believe that mutations in the CHRNA2, CHRNA4, and CHRNB2 genes affect the normal release and uptake of certain neurotransmitters in the brain. The resulting changes in signaling between neurons likely trigger the abnormal brain activity associated with seizures.  The seizures associated with ADNFLE begin in areas of the brain called the frontal lobes. These regions of the brain are involved in many critical functions, including reasoning, planning, judgment, and problem-solving. It is unclear why mutations in the CHRNA2, CHRNA4, and CHRNB2 genes cause seizures in the frontal lobes rather than elsewhere in the brain. Researchers are also working to determine why these seizures occur most often during sleep.  The genetic cause of ADNFLE has been identified in only a small percentage of affected families. In some cases, a gene other than those that make up the nAChR are involved. In the remaining families, the cause of the condition is unknown. Researchers are searching for other genetic changes, including mutations in other subunits of nAChR, that may underlie the condition.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to raise the risk of developing epilepsy. About 70 percent of people who inherit a mutation in the CHRNA2, CHRNA4, or CHRNB2 gene will develop seizures. In most cases, an affected person has one affected parent and other relatives with the condition. Other cases are described as sporadic, which means an affected person has no family history of the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of ADNFLE:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Autosomal Dominant Nocturnal Frontal Lobe Epilepsy  - Genetic Testing Registry: Epilepsy, nocturnal frontal lobe, type 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Epilepsy, nocturnal frontal lobe, type 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Epilepsy, nocturnal frontal lobe, type 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Epilepsy, nocturnal frontal lobe, type 4  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Epilepsy   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Autosomal dominant partial epilepsy with auditory features (ADPEAF) is an uncommon form of epilepsy that runs in families. This disorder causes seizures usually characterized by sound-related (auditory) symptoms such as buzzing, humming, or ringing. Some people experience more complex sounds during a seizure, such as specific voices or music, or changes in the volume of sounds. Some people with ADPEAF suddenly become unable to understand language before losing consciousness during a seizure. This inability to understand speech is known as receptive aphasia. Less commonly, seizures may cause visual hallucinations, a disturbance in the sense of smell, a feeling of dizziness or spinning (vertigo), or other symptoms affecting the senses.  Seizures associated with ADPEAF usually begin in adolescence or young adulthood. They may be triggered by specific sounds, such as a ringing telephone or speech, but in most cases the seizures do not have any recognized triggers. In most affected people, seizures are infrequent and effectively controlled with medication.  Most people with ADPEAF have seizures described as simple partial seizures, which do not cause a loss of consciousness. These seizures are thought to begin in a part of the brain called the lateral temporal lobe. In some people, seizure activity may spread from the lateral temporal lobe to affect other regions of the brain. If seizure activity spreads to affect the entire brain, it causes a loss of consciousness, muscle stiffening, and rhythmic jerking. Episodes that begin as partial seizures and spread throughout the brain are known as secondarily generalized seizures.
This condition appears to be uncommon, although its prevalence is unknown.
Mutations in the LGI1 gene cause ADPEAF. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called Lgi1 or epitempin, which is found primarily in nerve cells (neurons) in the brain. Although researchers have proposed several functions for this protein, its precise role in the brain remains uncertain.  Mutations in the LGI1 gene likely disrupt the function of epitempin. It is unclear how the altered protein leads to seizure activity in the brain.  LGI1 mutations have been identified in about half of all families diagnosed with ADPEAF. In the remaining families, the cause of the condition is unknown. Researchers are searching for other genetic changes that may underlie the condition.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered LGI1 gene in each cell is sufficient to raise the risk of developing epilepsy. About two-thirds of people who inherit a mutation in this gene will develop seizures. In most cases, an affected person has one affected parent and other relatives with the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of ADPEAF:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Autosomal Dominant Partial Epilepsy with Auditory Features  - Genetic Testing Registry: Epilepsy, lateral temporal lobe, autosomal dominant  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Partial (Focal) Seizure  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Seizures   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care