Donnai Barrow syndrome is an inherited disorder that affects many parts of the body. People with this condition generally have characteristic facial features, severe sensorineural hearing loss, vision problems and an absent or underdeveloped corpus callosum (the tissue connecting the left and right halves of the brain). Other features may include diaphragmatic hernia, omphalocele, and/or other abnormalities of the intestine or heart. Affected people often have mild to moderate intellectual disability and developmental delay. Donnai Barrow syndrome is caused by changes (mutations) in the LRP2 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment of this condition is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person but may include hearing aids and/or cochlear implants for hearing loss, corrective lenses for vision problems and surgery for certain physical abnormalities.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Donnai-Barrow syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Low-molecular-weight proteinuria 100% Non-acidotic proximal tubulopathy 100% Abnormality of the fontanelles or cranial sutures 90% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the corpus callosum 90% Broad nasal tip 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Depressed nasal bridge 90% High anterior hairline 90% Hypertelorism 90% Infra-orbital crease 90% Low-set, posteriorly rotated ears 90% Myopia 90% Proptosis 90% Proteinuria 90% Sensorineural hearing impairment 90% Short nose 90% Low-set ears 75% Broad forehead 50% Congenital diaphragmatic hernia 50% Diaphragmatic eventration 50% Macrocephaly 50% Omphalocele 50% Retinal detachment 50% Umbilical hernia 50% Visual impairment 50% Progressive visual loss 33% Retinal dystrophy 33% Abnormality of female internal genitalia 7.5% Chorioretinal coloboma 7.5% Hypoplasia of the iris 7.5% Intestinal malrotation 7.5% Iris coloboma 7.5% Seizures 7.5% Ventricular septal defect 7.5% Bicornuate uterus 5% Cataract 1% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the corpus callosum 11/11 Hypertelorism 12/12 Sensorineural hearing impairment 5/5 Severe Myopia 5/5 Short nose 9/11 Wide anterior fontanel 9/12 Congenital diaphragmatic hernia 9/13 Posteriorly rotated ears 7/11 Iris coloboma 3/6 Omphalocele 6/12 Intestinal malrotation 3/13 Autosomal recessive inheritance - Hypoplasia of midface - Malar flattening - Partial agenesis of the corpus callosum - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Although its prevalence is unknown, Donnai-Barrow syndrome appears to be a rare disorder. A few dozen affected individuals have been reported in many regions of the world.
Mutations in the LRP2 gene cause Donnai-Barrow syndrome. The LRP2 gene provides instructions for making a protein called megalin, which functions as a receptor. Receptor proteins have specific sites into which certain other proteins, called ligands, fit like keys into locks. Together, ligands and their receptors trigger signals that affect cell development and function. Megalin has many ligands involved in various body processes, including the absorption of vitamins A and D, immune functioning, stress response, and the transport of fats in the bloodstream.  Megalin is embedded in the membrane of cells that line the surfaces and cavities of the body (epithelial cells). The receptor helps move its ligands from the cell surface into the cell (endocytosis). It is active in the development and function of many parts of the body, including the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system), eyes, ears, lungs, intestine, reproductive system, and the small tubes in the kidneys where urine is formed (renal tubules).  LRP2 gene mutations that cause Donnai-Barrow syndrome are believed to result in the absence of functional megalin protein. The lack of functional megalin in the renal tubules causes megalin's various ligands to be excreted in the urine rather than being absorbed back into the bloodstream. The features of Donnai-Barrow syndrome are probably caused by the inability of megalin to help absorb these ligands, disruption of biochemical signaling pathways, or other effects of the nonfunctional megalin protein. However, it is unclear how these abnormalities result in the specific signs and symptoms of the disorder.  A condition previously classified as a separate disorder called facio-oculo-acoustico-renal (FOAR) syndrome has also been found to be caused by LRP2 mutations. FOAR syndrome is now considered to be the same disorder as Donnai-Barrow syndrome.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. In almost all cases, the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene but typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.  One individual with Donnai-Barrow syndrome was found to have inherited both copies of the mutated gene from his father as a result of a genetic change called uniparental disomy (UPD). UPD occurs when a person receives two copies of a chromosome, or part of a chromosome, from one parent and no copies from the other parent. UPD can occur as a random event during the formation of egg or sperm cells or may happen in early fetal development.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Donnai-Barrow syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Donnai-Barrow Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Donnai Barrow syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Diaphragmatic Hernia  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hearing Loss - Infants  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Omphalocele  - Nemours Foundation: Hearing Evaluation in Children   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care