Dopa-responsive dystonia (DRD) is an inherited type of dystonia that typically begins during childhood but may begin in adolescence or adulthood. Depending on the specific type of DRD, specific symptoms can vary. Features can range from mild to severe. In most cases, dystonia begins in the lower limbs and spreads to the upper limbs over time. Symptoms may include unusual limb positioning; a lack of coordination when walking or running; sleep problems; and episodes of depression. Affected people also often develop a group of movement abnormalities called parkinsonism. Although movement difficulties usually worsen with age, they often stabilize around age 30. DRD may be caused by mutations in the GCH1, TH or SPR genes, or the cause may be unknown. Depending on the genetic cause, DRD may be inherited in an autosomal dominant (most commonly) or autosomal recessive manner. This form of dystonia is called 'dopa-responsive' dystonia because the symptoms typically improve during treatment with levodopa and carbidopa.
How  Depending on the genetic cause of dopa-responsive dystonia (DRD), it may be inherited in an autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive manner. When DRD is caused by mutations in the GCH1 gene, it is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that having a mutation in only one of the 2 copies of the gene is enough to cause signs and symptoms of the disorder. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from an affected parent; other cases result from having a new (de novo) mutation in the gene. When a person with an autosomal dominant condition has children, each child has a 50% (1 in 2) chance to inherit the mutated gene. Some people who inherit a mutated GCH1 gene never develop features of DRD; this phenomenon is known as reduced penetrance. When DRD is caused by mutations in the TH gene, it is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that a person must have mutations in both of their copies of the gene to be affected. The parents of a person with an autosomal recessive condition usually each carry one copy of the mutated gene and are referred to as carriers. Carriers typically do not have signs or symptoms. When parents who are both carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) chance to be affected, a 50% chance to be an unaffected carrier like each parent, and a 25% chance to be unaffected and not be a carrier. When DRD is caused by mutations in the SPR gene, it can be inherited in an autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant manner.
 Dopa-responsive dystonia (DRD) is diagnosed based on the signs and symptoms present, results of laboratory tests (sometimes including genetic testing), and response to therapy with levodopa. If DRD is suspected, a therapeutic trial with low doses of levodopa remains the most practical approach to the diagnosis. It is generally agreed that people with childhood-onset dystonia of unknown cause should be treated initially with levodopa. The characteristic symptoms and response to treatment are sufficient to establish the diagnosis for people with the most common form, autosomal dominant DRD. There is only one gene in which mutations are known to cause this form of DRD, but not all people with the disorder are found to have a mutation in the responsible gene. While finding a mutation may provide information about prognosis, it does not alter the treatment. Other types of laboratory tests, such as measuring specific substances or enzymes in the blood or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), may be useful to support the diagnosis. For tyrosine hydroxylase deficiency, an autosomal recessive genetic cause of DRD, molecular genetic testing has confirmed the presence of mutations in all affected people to date. Specific laboratory tests performed on CSF help support the diagnosis but are not diagnostic on their own. For sepiapterin reductase deficiency, a very rare autosomal recessive form of DRD, there are distinctive findings in CSF and reduced or absent activity of sepiapterin reductase in fibroblasts. Molecular genetic testing can identify mutations in the responsible gene and confirm the diagnosis of this form of DRD. The major conditions that may have a similar presentation to DRD and are part of the differential diagnosis include early-onset parkinsonism, early-onset primary dystonia, and cerebral palsy or spastic paraplegia. People with specific questions about being evaluated for any form of dystonia should speak with a neurologist or other health care provider.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Dystonia 5, Dopa-responsive type. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance 5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Babinski sign - Childhood onset - Gait ataxia - Hyperreflexia - Parkinsonism - Parkinsonism with favorable response to dopaminergic medication - Pes cavus - Phenotypic variability - Postural tremor - Scoliosis - Talipes equinovarus - Torticollis - Transient hyperphenylalaninemia - Writer's cramp - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Dopa-responsive dystonia is a disorder that involves involuntary muscle contractions, tremors, and other uncontrolled movements (dystonia). The features of this condition range from mild to severe. This form of dystonia is called dopa-responsive dystonia because the signs and symptoms typically improve with sustained use of a medication known as L-Dopa.  Signs and symptoms of dopa-responsive dystonia usually appear during childhood, most commonly around age 6. The first signs of the condition are typically the development of inward- and upward-turning feet (clubfeet) and dystonia in the lower limbs. The dystonia spreads to the upper limbs over time; beginning in adolescence, the whole body is typically involved. Affected individuals may have unusual limb positioning and a lack of coordination when walking or running. Some people with this condition have sleep problems or episodes of depression more frequently than would normally be expected.  Over time, affected individuals often develop a group of movement abnormalities called parkinsonism. These abnormalities include unusually slow movement (bradykinesia), muscle rigidity, tremors, and an inability to hold the body upright and balanced (postural instability).  The movement difficulties associated with dopa-responsive dystonia usually worsen with age but stabilize around age 30. A characteristic feature of dopa-responsive dystonia is worsening of movement problems later in the day and an improvement of symptoms in the morning, after sleep (diurnal fluctuation).  Rarely, the movement problems associated with dopa-responsive dystonia do not appear until adulthood. In these adult-onset cases, parkinsonism usually develops before dystonia, and movement problems are slow to worsen and do not show diurnal fluctuations.
Dopa-responsive dystonia is estimated to affect 1 per million people worldwide. However, the disorder is likely underdiagnosed because the condition may not be identified in people with mild symptoms, or it may be misdiagnosed in people who have symptoms similar to other movement disorders.
Mutations in the GCH1 gene are the most common cause of dopa-responsive dystonia. Less often, mutations in the TH or SPR gene cause this condition.  The GCH1 gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called GTP cyclohydrolase. This enzyme is involved in the first of three steps in the production of a molecule called tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4). The SPR gene, which provides instructions for making the sepiapterin reductase enzyme, is involved in the last step of tetrahydrobiopterin production. Tetrahydrobiopterin helps process several protein building blocks (amino acids), and is involved in the production of chemicals called neurotransmitters, which transmit signals between nerve cells in the brain. Specifically, tetrahydrobiopterin is involved in the production of two neurotransmitters called dopamine and serotonin. Among their many functions, dopamine transmits signals within the brain to produce smooth physical movements, and serotonin regulates mood, emotion, sleep, and appetite.  The protein produced from the TH gene is also involved in dopamine production. The TH gene provides instructions for making the enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase, which helps convert the amino acid tyrosine to dopamine.  Mutations in the GCH1 or SPR gene impair the production of tetrahydrobiopterin, which leads to a decrease in the amount of available dopamine. TH gene mutations result in the production of a tyrosine hydroxylase enzyme with reduced function, which leads to a decrease in dopamine production. A reduction in the amount of dopamine interferes with the brain's ability to produce smooth physical movements, resulting in the dystonia, tremor, and other movement problems associated with dopa-responsive dystonia. Sleep and mood disorders also occur in some individuals with GCH1 or SPR gene mutations; these disorders likely result from a disruption in the production of serotonin. Problems with sleep and episodes of depression are not seen in people with dopa-responsive dystonia caused by TH gene mutations, which is sometimes referred to as Segawa syndrome.  Some people with dopa-responsive dystonia do not have an identified mutation in the GCH1, TH, or SPR gene. The cause of the condition in these individuals is unknown.
When dopa-responsive dystonia is caused by mutations in the GCH1 gene, it is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.  Some people who inherit the altered GCH1 gene never develop features of dopa-responsive dystonia. (This situation is known as reduced penetrance.) It is unclear why some people with a mutated gene develop the disease and other people with a mutated gene do not. For unknown reasons, dopa-responsive dystonia caused by mutations in the GCH1 gene affects females two to four times more often than males.  When TH gene mutations are responsible for causing dopa-responsive dystonia, it is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.  When dopa-responsive dystonia is caused by mutations in the SPR gene, it can have either an autosomal recessive or, less commonly, an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of dopa-responsive dystonia:  - Dartmouth-Hitchcock Children's Hospital at Dartmouth  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Dystonia Overview  - Gene Review: Gene Review: GTP Cyclohydrolase 1-Deficient Dopa-Responsive Dystonia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Dystonia 5, Dopa-responsive type  - Genetic Testing Registry: Segawa syndrome, autosomal recessive  - Genetic Testing Registry: Sepiapterin reductase deficiency   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care