Dowling-Degos disease is a skin condition characterized by a lacy or net-like (reticulate) pattern of abnormally dark skin coloring (hyperpigmentation), particularly in the body's folds and creases. Other features may include dark lesions on the face and back that resemble blackheads, red bumps around the mouth that resemble acne, depressed or pitted scars on the face similar to acne scars but with no history of acne, cysts within hair follicles (pilar cysts) on the scalp, and rarely, patches of skin that are unusually light in color (hypopigmented). Symptoms typically develop in late childhood or in adolescence and progress over time. While the skin changes caused by Dowling-Degos disease can be bothersome, they typically don't cause health problems. Dowling-Degos disease is caused by mutations in the KRT5 gene. This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.
 There is no cure for Dowling-Degos disease. Many different treatments have been tried for this condition, but none has proven effective in eliminating the symptoms for all patients. Topical retinoic acids, topical steroids, hydroquinone, tretinoin, and systemic retinoids have been used without success. Limited reports indicate at least temporary therapeutic benefit with topical adapalene. Various laser systems (CO2 and erbiumYAG) have also shown some promise.    Additional articles that address this topic can be accessed below: Altomare G, Capella GL, Fracchiolla C, Frigerio E. Effectiveness of topical adapalene in Dowling-Degos disease. Dermatology. 1999;198(2):176-7.
Dowling-Degos disease appears to be a rare condition, although its prevalence is unknown.
Mutations in the KRT5 gene cause Dowling-Degos disease. The KRT5 gene provides instructions for making a protein called keratin 5. Keratins are a family of proteins that form the structural framework of certain cells, particularly cells that make up the skin, hair, and nails. Keratin 5 is produced in cells called keratinocytes found in the outer layer of the skin (the epidermis). Keratin 5 is one component of molecules called keratin intermediate filaments. These filaments assemble into strong networks that help attach keratinocytes together and anchor the epidermis to underlying layers of skin. Researchers believe that keratin 5 may also play a role in transporting melanosomes, which are cellular structures that produce a pigment called melanin. The transport of these structures into keratinocytes is important for normal skin coloration (pigmentation).  KRT5 gene mutations that cause Dowling-Degos disease lead to a decrease in the amount of functional keratin 5 protein that is produced. A reduction in keratin 5 can impair the formation of keratin intermediate filaments. As a result, the normal organization of the epidermis is altered, leading to the development of different types of skin lesions. Additionally, a decrease in keratin 5 may disrupt the movement of pigment-carrying melanosomes into keratinocytes, where they are needed for normal skin pigmentation. This disruption of melanosome transport is thought to cause the pigmentation abnormalities seen in individuals with Dowling-Degos disease.  Some people with Dowling-Degos disease do not have an identified mutation in the KRT5 gene. In these cases, the cause of the condition is unknown.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.