Duane syndrome type 3 is a disorder of eye movement. The affected eye, or eyes, has limited ability to move both inward toward the nose and outward toward the ears. The eye opening narrows and the eyeball pulls in when looking inward toward the nose. About 15 percent of all cases of Duane syndrome are type 3. Most cases occur without other signs and symptoms. In most people with Duane syndrome type 3, the cause is unknown; but it can sometimes be caused by mutations in the CHN1 gene and inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Duane syndrome type 3. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Ophthalmoparesis 90% Strabismus 90% Anteverted nares 50% Blepharophimosis 50% Deeply set eye 50% Abnormal form of the vertebral bodies 7.5% Abnormal localization of kidney 7.5% Abnormality of the pupil 7.5% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the iris 7.5% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the radius 7.5% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the thumb 7.5% Brachydactyly syndrome 7.5% Chorioretinal coloboma 7.5% Cleft palate 7.5% Cognitive impairment 7.5% External ear malformation 7.5% Hearing impairment 7.5% Heterochromia iridis 7.5% Microcephaly 7.5% Nystagmus 7.5% Optic atrophy 7.5% Ptosis 7.5% Seizures 7.5% Short neck 7.5% Talipes 7.5% Visual impairment 7.5% Wide nasal bridge 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Congenital strabismus - Duane anomaly - Impaired convergence - Impaired ocular abduction - Impaired ocular adduction - Palpebral fissure narrowing on adduction - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Duane syndrome type 1 is the most common type of Duane syndrome, an eye movement disorder that is present at birth. People with Duane syndrome have restricted ability to move the affected eye(s) outward toward the ear (abduction) and/or inward toward the nose (adduction). The different types are distinguished by the eye movements that are most restricted. Duane syndrome type 1 is characterized by absent to very restricted abduction and normal to mildly restricted adduction. The eye opening (palpebral fissure) narrows and the eyeball retracts into the orbit with adduction. With abduction, the reverse occurs. One or both eyes may be affected. The majority of cases are sporadic (not inherited), while about 10% are familial. 70% of affected people do not have any other abnormalities at birth (isolated Duane syndrome).
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Duane syndrome type 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Ophthalmoparesis 90% Strabismus 90% Anteverted nares 50% Blepharophimosis 50% Deeply set eye 50% Abnormal form of the vertebral bodies 7.5% Abnormal localization of kidney 7.5% Abnormality of the pupil 7.5% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the iris 7.5% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the radius 7.5% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the thumb 7.5% Brachydactyly syndrome 7.5% Chorioretinal coloboma 7.5% Cleft palate 7.5% Cognitive impairment 7.5% External ear malformation 7.5% Hearing impairment 7.5% Heterochromia iridis 7.5% Microcephaly 7.5% Nystagmus 7.5% Optic atrophy 7.5% Ptosis 7.5% Seizures 7.5% Short neck 7.5% Talipes 7.5% Visual impairment 7.5% Wide nasal bridge 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Congenital strabismus - Duane anomaly - Impaired convergence - Impaired ocular abduction - Impaired ocular adduction - Palpebral fissure narrowing on adduction - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Management of Duane syndrome is mainly supportive. It may involve treatment of amblyopia ("lazy eye"); wearing glasses or contact lenses; the use of prisms to correct for abnormal head posture; or possible eye muscle surgery. The majority of people with Duane syndrome do not need surgery. However, surgery may be indicated if necessary to reduce severe misalignment of the eyes (strabismus); improve an unacceptable head position; treat a significant upshoot or downshoot; or fix displacement of the eyeball within the orbit (enophthalmos). Unfortunately, surgery does not restore function to the affected nerve and muscle, and no surgical technique has been completely successful in eliminating the abnormal eye movements. Surgery for Duane syndrome usually involves adjusting the other eye muscles to compensate and allow for better eye alignment. While it cannot fix the underlying problem, it can substantially improve signs or symptoms. Some surgical procedures or combinations of procedures may be successful in improving or eliminating head turns and strabismus.
Duane syndrome is a disorder of eye movement. This condition prevents outward movement of the eye (toward the ear), and in some cases may also limit inward eye movement (toward the nose). As the eye moves inward, the eyelids partially close and the eyeball pulls back (retracts) into its socket. Usually only one eye is affected. Some people with Duane syndrome develop amblyopia ("lazy eye"), a condition that causes vision loss in the affected eye. Most cases occur without other signs and symptoms. There are three forms of Duane syndrome, designated types 1, 2, and 3. The types vary in which eye movements are most severely restricted (inward, outward, or both). All three types are characterized by retraction of the eyeball as the eye moves inward and are inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Duane syndrome type 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Ophthalmoparesis 90% Strabismus 90% Anteverted nares 50% Blepharophimosis 50% Deeply set eye 50% Amblyopia 48% Abnormal form of the vertebral bodies 7.5% Abnormal localization of kidney 7.5% Abnormality of the pupil 7.5% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the iris 7.5% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the radius 7.5% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the thumb 7.5% Brachydactyly syndrome 7.5% Chorioretinal coloboma 7.5% Cleft palate 7.5% Cognitive impairment 7.5% External ear malformation 7.5% Hearing impairment 7.5% Heterochromia iridis 7.5% Microcephaly 7.5% Nystagmus 7.5% Optic atrophy 7.5% Ptosis 7.5% Seizures 7.5% Short neck 7.5% Talipes 7.5% Visual impairment 7.5% Wide nasal bridge 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Duane anomaly - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Isolated Duane retraction syndrome is a disorder of eye movement. This condition prevents outward movement of the eye (toward the ear), and in some cases may also limit inward eye movement (toward the nose). As the eye moves inward, the eyelids partially close and the eyeball pulls back (retracts) into its socket. Most commonly, only one eye is affected. About 10 percent of people with isolated Duane retraction syndrome develop amblyopia ("lazy eye"), a condition that causes vision loss in the affected eye.  About 70 percent of all cases of Duane retraction syndrome are isolated, which means they occur without other signs and symptoms. Duane retraction syndrome can also occur as part of syndromes that affect other areas of the body. For example, Duane-radial ray syndrome is characterized by this eye disorder in conjunction with abnormalities of bones in the arms and hands.  Researchers have identified three forms of isolated Duane retraction syndrome, designated types I, II, and III. The types vary in which eye movements are most severely restricted (inward, outward, or both). All three types are characterized by retraction of the eyeball as the eye moves inward.
Isolated Duane retraction syndrome affects an estimated 1 in 1,000 people worldwide. This condition accounts for 1 percent to 5 percent of all cases of abnormal eye alignment (strabismus). For unknown reasons, isolated Duane syndrome affects females more often than males.
In most people with isolated Duane retraction syndrome, the cause of the condition is unknown. However, researchers have identified mutations in one gene, CHN1, that cause the disorder in a small number of families. The CHN1 gene provides instructions for making a protein that is involved in the early development of the nervous system. Specifically, the protein appears to be critical for the formation of nerves that control several of the muscles surrounding the eyes (extraocular muscles). Mutations in the CHN1 gene disrupt the normal development of these nerves and the extraocular muscles needed for side-to-side eye movement. Abnormal function of these muscles leads to restricted eye movement and related problems with vision.
Isolated Duane retraction syndrome usually occurs in people with no history of the disorder in their family. These cases are described as simplex, and their genetic cause is unknown.  Less commonly, isolated Duane retraction syndrome can run in families. Familial cases most often have an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. When isolated Duane retraction syndrome is caused by CHN1 mutations, it has an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern.  In a few families with isolated Duane retraction syndrome, the pattern of affected family members suggests autosomal recessive inheritance. In these families, one or more children are affected, although the parents typically have no signs or symptoms of the condition. The parents of children with an autosomal recessive condition are called carriers, which means they carry one mutated copy of a gene in each cell. In affected children, both copies of the gene in each cell are mutated. However, researchers have not discovered the gene or genes responsible for autosomal recessive isolated Duane retraction syndrome.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of isolated Duane retraction syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Duane Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Duane's syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Extraocular Muscle Function Testing   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care