Dumping syndrome occurs when food, especially sugar, moves too fast from the stomach to the duodenumthe first part of the small intestinein the upper gastrointestinal (GI) tract. This condition is also called rapid gastric emptying. Dumping syndrome has two forms, based on when symptoms occur:
                
- early dumping syndromeoccurs 10 to 30 minutes after a meal  - late dumping syndromeoccurs 2 to 3 hours after a meal
Dumping syndrome is caused by problems with the storage of food particles in the stomach and emptying of particles into the duodenum. Early dumping syndrome results from rapid movement of fluid into the intestine following a sudden addition of a large amount of food from the stomach. Late dumping syndrome results from rapid movement of sugar into the intestine, which raises the body's blood glucose level and causes the pancreas to increase its release of the hormone insulin. The increased release of insulin causes a rapid drop in blood glucose levels, a condition known as hypoglycemia, or low blood sugar.
The symptoms of early and late dumping syndrome are different and vary from person to person. Early dumping syndrome symptoms may include
                
- nausea  - vomiting  - abdominal pain and cramping  - diarrhea  - feeling uncomfortably full or bloated after a meal  - sweating  - weakness  - dizziness  - flushing, or blushing of the face or skin  - rapid or irregular heartbeat
                
- hypoglycemia  - sweating  - weakness  - rapid or irregular heartbeat  - flushing  - dizziness
                
About 75 percent of people with dumping syndrome report symptoms of early dumping syndrome and about 25 percent report symptoms of late dumping syndrome. Some people have symptoms of both types of dumping syndrome.1
Treatment for dumping syndrome includes changes in eating, diet, and nutrition; medication; and, in some cases, surgery. Many people with dumping syndrome have mild symptoms that improve over time with simple dietary changes.
The first step to minimizing symptoms of dumping syndrome involves changes in eating, diet, and nutrition, and may include
                
- eating five or six small meals a day instead of three larger meals  - delaying liquid intake until at least 30 minutes after a meal  - increasing intake of protein, fiber, and complex carbohydratesfound in starchy foods such as oatmeal and rice  - avoiding simple sugars such as table sugar, which can be found in candy, syrup, sodas, and juice beverages  - increasing the thickness of food by adding pectin or guar gumplant extracts used as thickening agents
                
Some people find that lying down for 30 minutes after meals also helps reduce symptoms.
                
Medication
                
A health care provider may prescribe octreotide acetate (Sandostatin) to treat dumping syndrome symptoms. The medication works by slowing gastric emptying and inhibiting the release of insulin and other GI hormones. Octreotide comes in short- and long-acting formulas. The short-acting formula is injected subcutaneouslyunder the skinor intravenouslyinto a veintwo to four times a day. A health care provider may perform the injections or may train the patient or patient's friend or relative to perform the injections. A health care provider injects the long-acting formula into the buttocks muscles once every 4 weeks. Complications of octreotide treatment include increased or decreased blood glucose levels, pain at the injection site, gallstones, and fatty, foul-smelling stools.
                
Surgery
                
A person may need surgery if dumping syndrome is caused by previous gastric surgery or if the condition is not responsive to other treatments. For most people, the type of surgery depends on the type of gastric surgery performed previously. However, surgery to correct dumping syndrome often has unsuccessful results.