Erectile dysfunction (ED) is a common type of male sexual dysfunction. It is when a man has trouble getting or keeping an erection. ED becomes more common as you get older. But it's not a natural part of aging.    Some people have trouble speaking with their doctors about sex. But if you have ED, you should tell your doctor. ED can be a sign of health problems. It may mean your blood vessels are clogged. It may mean you have nerve damage from diabetes. If you don't see your doctor, these problems will go untreated.     Your doctor can offer several new treatments for ED. For many men, the answer is as simple as taking a pill. Getting more exercise, losing weight, or stopping smoking may also help.     NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
Erectile dysfunction* is when you cannot get or keep an erection firm enough to have sex. You may have ED if you
                
- can get an erection sometimes, though not every time  - can get an erection, yet it does not last long enough for sex  - are unable to get an erection at all
                
ED is sometimes called impotence; however, doctors use this term less often now.
                

                
*See the Pronunciation Guide for tips on how to say the words in bold type.
Erectile dysfunction often has more than one cause. Many diseases can damage nerves, arteries, and muscles. Some can lead to ED, such as
                
- high blood pressure  - diabetes, when your blood glucose, also called blood sugar, is too high  - clogged arteries  - heart and blood vessel disease  - chronic kidney disease  - multiple sclerosis, a disease that attacks the nerves  - treatments for prostate cancer, including radiation, surgery to remove the prostate, and hormone treatments  - injury to the penis, spinal cord, prostate, bladder, or pelvis  - surgery for bladder cancer  - Peyronies disease, in which scar tissue, called a plaque, forms in the penis
                
Unhealthy lifestyle choices, such as smoking, drinking too much alcohol, using illegal drugs, being overweight, and not exercising, can lead to ED.
                
Mental health problems such as the following can also cause or worsen ED:
                
- depression  - fear of sexual failure  - guilt  - low self-esteem  - stress  - worry
                
Even when ED has a physical cause, mental health problems can make ED worse. For example, a physical problem may slow your sexual arousal, which may make you more nervous and worsen your ED.
                
In addition, ED can be a side effect of many common medicines. A small number of ED cases result from low testosterone, a male hormone.
Erectile dysfunction affects men of all races and in all parts of the world. Men are more likely to have ED as they get older. For example, ED occurs in
                
- about 12 percent of men younger than 60  - 22 percent of men age 60 to 69  - 30 percent of men age 70 or older
You can prevent many of the causes of ED by making healthy lifestyle choices. Following a healthy diet may help prevent ED. Quitting smoking and getting physical activity are also important ways to prevent ED.
                
Physical activity increases blood flow throughout your body, including your penis. Talk with your doctor before starting new activities. If you have not been active, start slow, with easier activities such as walking at a normal pace or gardening. Then you can work up to harder activities such as walking briskly or swimming. Try to aim for at least 30 minutes of activity most days of the week.
To prevent ED, you should eat a healthy diet of whole-grain foods, fruits and vegetables, low-fat dairy foods, and lean meats. A diet that causes you to be overweight and have heart and blood vessel disease can also lead to ED. You should avoid foods high in fat and sodium, the main part of salt. You should also avoid smoking, drinking too much alcohol, or using illegal drugs.