Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a rare, inherited disease. "Inherited" means the disease is passed from parents to children through genes. With PCD, this process is very complex. Researchers are still learning how the disease is inherited and which genes are involved.
                
Generally, a child must inherit faulty genes from both parents to have PCD. These genes affect how cilia grow and function. Cilia are tiny, hair-like structures that line the airways.
                
The airways include your nose and linked air passages; mouth; larynx (LAR-ingks), or voice box; trachea (TRA-ke-ah), or windpipe; and tubes called bronchial tubes or bronchi, and their branches.
                
Cilia move mucus (a slimy substance) through your airways and toward your mouth to be coughed or sneezed out of your body. The mucus contains inhaled dust, bacteria, and other small particles.
                
Faulty genes may cause the cilia to be the wrong size or shape or move in the wrong way. Sometimes the cilia are missing altogether. If the cilia don't work well, bacteria stay in your airways. This can cause breathing problems, infections, and other disorders.
                
Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia
                

                
No single faulty gene causes all cases of PCD. Rather, many genes are associated with the disease.
                
If a child inherits a faulty gene (or genes) from only one parent, he or she may be a "PCD carrier." Carriers usually have no symptoms of PCD. However, carriers can pass faulty PCD genes on to their children.
Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a rare disease that affects both males and females. The disease also affects people from all racial and ethnic groups.
                
Some people who have PCD have breathing problems from the moment of birth. However, other people can go through all or most of their lives without knowing that they have the disease.
Primary ciliary dyskinesia occurs in approximately 1 in 16,000 individuals.
Primary ciliary dyskinesia can result from mutations in many different genes. These genes provide instructions for making proteins that form the inner structure of cilia and produce the force needed for cilia to bend. Coordinated back and forth movement of cilia is necessary for the normal functioning of many organs and tissues. The movement of cilia also helps establish the left-right axis (the imaginary line that separates the left and right sides of the body) during embryonic development.  Mutations in the genes that cause primary ciliary dyskinesia result in defective cilia that move abnormally or are unable to move (immotile). Because cilia have many important functions within the body, defects in these cell structures cause a variety of signs and symptoms.  Mutations in the DNAI1 and DNAH5 genes account for up to 30 percent of all cases of primary ciliary dyskinesia. Mutations in the other genes associated with this condition are found in only a small percentage of cases. In many people with primary ciliary dyskinesia, the cause of the disorder is unknown.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of primary ciliary dyskinesia:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Ciliary dyskinesia, primary, 17  - Genetic Testing Registry: Kartagener syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Primary ciliary dyskinesia   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care