The exact prevalence of dyskeratosis congenita is unknown. It is estimated to occur in approximately 1 in 1 million people.
Dyskeratosis congenita can have different inheritance patterns.  When dyskeratosis congenita is caused by DKC1 gene mutations, it is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. The DKC1 gene is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.  When dyskeratosis congenita is caused by mutations in other genes, it can be inherited in an autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive pattern. Autosomal dominant means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Autosomal recessive means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of dyskeratosis congenita:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Dyskeratosis Congenita  - Genetic Testing Registry: Dyskeratosis congenita  - Genetic Testing Registry: Dyskeratosis congenita X-linked  - Genetic Testing Registry: Dyskeratosis congenita autosomal dominant  - Genetic Testing Registry: Dyskeratosis congenita autosomal recessive 1  - Seattle Children's Hospital   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care