Spondylocostal dysostosis is a group of conditions characterized by abnormal development of the bones in the spine and ribs. In the spine, the vertebrae are misshapen and fused. Many people with this condition have an abnormal side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis). The ribs may be fused together or missing. These bone malformations lead to short, rigid necks and short midsections. Infants with spondylocostal dysostosis have small, narrow chests that cannot fully expand. This can lead to life-threatening breathing problems. Males with this condition are at an increased risk for inguinal hernia, where the diaphragm is pushed down, causing the abdomen to bulge out. There are several types of spondylocostal dysostosis. These types have similar features and are distinguished by their genetic cause and how they are inherited.  Spondylocostal dysostosis 3 is caused by mutations in the LFNG gene. It is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive and may include respiratory support and surgery to correct inguinal hernia and scoliosis.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spondylocostal dysostosis 3. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal form of the vertebral bodies 90% Abnormality of immune system physiology 90% Abnormality of the intervertebral disk 90% Abnormality of the ribs 90% Intrauterine growth retardation 90% Respiratory insufficiency 90% Scoliosis 90% Short neck 90% Short stature 90% Short thorax 90% Vertebral segmentation defect 90% Kyphosis 50% Abnormality of female internal genitalia 7.5% Abnormality of the ureter 7.5% Anomalous pulmonary venous return 7.5% Anteverted nares 7.5% Broad forehead 7.5% Camptodactyly of finger 7.5% Cleft palate 7.5% Cognitive impairment 7.5% Congenital diaphragmatic hernia 7.5% Cryptorchidism 7.5% Depressed nasal bridge 7.5% Displacement of the external urethral meatus 7.5% Finger syndactyly 7.5% Long philtrum 7.5% Low-set, posteriorly rotated ears 7.5% Macrocephaly 7.5% Meningocele 7.5% Microcephaly 7.5% Prominent occiput 7.5% Spina bifida occulta 7.5% Umbilical hernia 7.5% Urogenital fistula 7.5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Slender finger - Supernumerary vertebral ossification centers - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Spondylocostal dysostosis is a group of conditions characterized by abnormal development of the bones in the spine and ribs. In the spine, the vertebrae are misshapen and fused. Many people with this condition have an abnormal side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis). The ribs may be fused together or missing. These bone malformations lead to short, rigid necks and short midsections. Infants with spondylocostal dysostosis have small, narrow chests that cannot fully expand. This can lead to life-threatening breathing problems. Males with this condition are at an increased risk for inguinal hernia, where the diaphragm is pushed down, causing the abdomen to bulge out. There are several types of spondylocostal dysostosis. These types have similar features and are distinguished by their genetic cause and how they are inherited.  Spondylocostal dysostosis 2 is caused by mutations in the MESP2 gene. It is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive and may include respiratory support and surgery to correct inguinal hernia and scoliosis.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spondylocostal dysostosis 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal form of the vertebral bodies 90% Abnormality of immune system physiology 90% Abnormality of the intervertebral disk 90% Abnormality of the ribs 90% Intrauterine growth retardation 90% Respiratory insufficiency 90% Scoliosis 90% Short neck 90% Short stature 90% Short thorax 90% Vertebral segmentation defect 90% Kyphosis 50% Restrictive respiratory insufficiency 44% Abnormality of female internal genitalia 7.5% Abnormality of the ureter 7.5% Anomalous pulmonary venous return 7.5% Anteverted nares 7.5% Broad forehead 7.5% Camptodactyly of finger 7.5% Cleft palate 7.5% Cognitive impairment 7.5% Congenital diaphragmatic hernia 7.5% Cryptorchidism 7.5% Depressed nasal bridge 7.5% Displacement of the external urethral meatus 7.5% Finger syndactyly 7.5% Long philtrum 7.5% Low-set, posteriorly rotated ears 7.5% Macrocephaly 7.5% Meningocele 7.5% Microcephaly 7.5% Prominent occiput 7.5% Spina bifida occulta 7.5% Umbilical hernia 7.5% Urogenital fistula 7.5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Disproportionate short-trunk short stature - Recurrent respiratory infections - Rib fusion - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Spondylocostal dysostosis is a group of conditions characterized by abnormal development of the bones in the spine and ribs. In the spine, the vertebrae are misshapen and fused. Many people with this condition have an abnormal side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis). The ribs may be fused together or missing. These bone malformations lead to short, rigid necks and short midsections. Infants with spondylocostal dysostosis have small, narrow chests that cannot fully expand. This can lead to life-threatening breathing problems. Males with this condition are at an increased risk for inguinal hernia, where the diaphragm is pushed down, causing the abdomen to bulge out. There are several types of spondylocostal dysostosis. These types have similar features and are distinguished by their genetic cause and how they are inherited.  Spondylocostal dysostosis 1 is caused by mutations in the DLL3 gene. It is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive and may include respiratory support and surgery to correct inguinal hernia and scoliosis.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spondylocostal dysostosis 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal form of the vertebral bodies 90% Abnormality of immune system physiology 90% Abnormality of the intervertebral disk 90% Abnormality of the ribs 90% Intrauterine growth retardation 90% Respiratory insufficiency 90% Scoliosis 90% Short neck 90% Short stature 90% Short thorax 90% Vertebral segmentation defect 90% Kyphosis 50% Abnormality of female internal genitalia 7.5% Abnormality of the ureter 7.5% Anomalous pulmonary venous return 7.5% Anteverted nares 7.5% Broad forehead 7.5% Camptodactyly of finger 7.5% Cleft palate 7.5% Cognitive impairment 7.5% Congenital diaphragmatic hernia 7.5% Cryptorchidism 7.5% Depressed nasal bridge 7.5% Displacement of the external urethral meatus 7.5% Finger syndactyly 7.5% Long philtrum 7.5% Low-set, posteriorly rotated ears 7.5% Macrocephaly 7.5% Meningocele 7.5% Microcephaly 7.5% Prominent occiput 7.5% Spina bifida occulta 7.5% Umbilical hernia 7.5% Urogenital fistula 7.5% Abnormality of the odontoid process - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Block vertebrae - Death in infancy - Disproportionate short-trunk short stature - Hemivertebrae - Recurrent respiratory infections - Rib fusion - Severe short stature - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Spondylocostal dysostosis is a group of conditions characterized by abnormal development of the bones in the spine and ribs. In the spine, the vertebrae are misshapen and fused. Many people with this condition have an abnormal side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis). The ribs may be fused together or missing. These bone malformations lead to short, rigid necks and short midsections. Infants with spondylocostal dysostosis have small, narrow chests that cannot fully expand. This can lead to life-threatening breathing problems. Males with this condition are at an increased risk for inguinal hernia, where the diaphragm is pushed down, causing the abdomen to bulge out. There are several types of spondylocostal dysostosis. These types have similar features and are distinguished by their genetic cause and how they are inherited.  Spondylocostal dysostosis 4 is caused by mutations in the HES7 gene. It is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive and may include respiratory support and surgery to correct inguinal hernia and scoliosis.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spondylocostal dysostosis 4. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal form of the vertebral bodies 90% Abnormality of immune system physiology 90% Abnormality of the intervertebral disk 90% Abnormality of the ribs 90% Intrauterine growth retardation 90% Respiratory insufficiency 90% Scoliosis 90% Short neck 90% Short stature 90% Short thorax 90% Vertebral segmentation defect 90% Kyphosis 50% Abnormality of female internal genitalia 7.5% Abnormality of the ureter 7.5% Anomalous pulmonary venous return 7.5% Anteverted nares 7.5% Broad forehead 7.5% Camptodactyly of finger 7.5% Cleft palate 7.5% Cognitive impairment 7.5% Congenital diaphragmatic hernia 7.5% Cryptorchidism 7.5% Depressed nasal bridge 7.5% Displacement of the external urethral meatus 7.5% Finger syndactyly 7.5% Long philtrum 7.5% Low-set, posteriorly rotated ears 7.5% Macrocephaly 7.5% Meningocele 7.5% Microcephaly 7.5% Prominent occiput 7.5% Spina bifida occulta 7.5% Umbilical hernia 7.5% Urogenital fistula 7.5% Abnormality of the odontoid process - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Block vertebrae - Hemivertebrae - Missing ribs - Myelomeningocele - Restrictive respiratory insufficiency - Rib fusion - Situs inversus totalis - Unilateral vertebral artery hypoplasia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Spondylocostal dysostosis is a group of conditions characterized by abnormal development of bones in the spine and ribs. The bones of the spine (vertebrae) are misshapen and abnormally joined together (fused). Many people with this condition have abnormal side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis) due to malformation of the vertebrae. In addition to spine abnormalities, some of the rib bones may be fused together or missing. Affected individuals have short, rigid necks and short midsections because of the bone malformations. As a result, people with spondylocostal dysostosis have short bodies but normal length arms and legs, called short-trunk dwarfism.  The spine and rib abnormalities cause other signs and symptoms of spondylocostal dysostosis. Infants with this condition are born with small chests that cannot expand adequately, often leading to life-threatening breathing problems. As the lungs expand in the narrow chest, the muscle that separates the abdomen from the chest cavity (the diaphragm) is forced down and the abdomen is pushed out. The increased pressure in the abdomen can cause a soft out-pouching around the lower abdomen (inguinal hernia), particularly in males with spondylocostal dysostosis.  There are several types of spondylocostal dysostosis, designated types 1 through 4 and the autosomal dominant (AD) type. These types have similar features and are distinguished by their genetic cause and inheritance pattern. Spondylocostal dysostosis has often been grouped with a similar condition called spondylothoracic dysostosis, and both are called Jarcho-Levin syndrome; however, they are now considered distinct conditions.
Spondylocostal dysostosis is a rare condition, although its exact prevalence is unknown.
Mutations in at least four genes are known to cause spondylocostal dysostosis: Mutations in the DLL3 gene cause spondylocostal dysostosis type 1; mutations in the MESP2 gene cause spondylocostal dysostosis type 2; mutations in the LFNG gene cause spondylocostal dysostosis type 3; and mutations in the HES7 gene cause spondylocostal dysostosis type 4. The genetic cause of AD spondylocostal dysostosis is unknown.  The DLL3, MESP2, LFNG, and HES7 genes play a role in the Notch signaling pathway, an important pathway in embryonic development. One of the functions of the Notch pathway is separating future vertebrae from one another during early development, a process called somite segmentation. When this pathway is disrupted, somite segmentation does not occur properly, resulting in the malformation and fusion of the bones of the spine and ribs seen in spondylocostal dysostosis.  Mutations in the four identified genes account for approximately 25 percent of diagnosed spondylocostal dysostosis. Researchers suggest that additional genes in the Notch signaling pathway might also be involved.
Spondylocostal dysostosis can have different inheritance patterns. Types 1, 2, 3, and 4 are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. AD spondylocostal dysostosis is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. Autosomal dominant inheritance means that one copy of an altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder, although in these cases no causative genes have been identified. The signs and symptoms of spondylocostal dysostosis are typically more severe with autosomal recessive inheritance.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of spondylocostal dysostosis:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Spondylocostal Dysostosis, Autosomal Recessive  - Genetic Testing Registry: Jarcho-Levin syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Spondylocostal dysostosis 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Spondylocostal dysostosis 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Spondylocostal dysostosis 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Spondylocostal dysostosis 4, autosomal recessive  - KidsHealth: X-Ray Exam (Scoliosis)  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Scoliosis   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care