Spondylothoracic dysostosis is a rare condition that affects the bones of the spine and the ribs. Signs and symptoms are generally present at birth and may include short-trunk dwarfism (a short body with normal length arms and legs); a small chest cavity; misshapen and abnormally fused vertebrae (bones of the spine); and fused ribs at the part nearest the spine. Affected people may also have life-threatening breathing problems and recurrent lung infections, which can significantly reduce lifespan. Spondylothoracic dysostosis is caused by changes (mutations) in the MESP2 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person and may include surgery for bone malformations and respiratory support.
 Signs and symptoms of spondylothoracic dysostosis, include spine and vertebral abnormalities which result in a shortened spine, neck, and trunk, as well as rib anomalies including fused ribs which in combination with the spine anomalies result in a "crab-like" appearance to the rib cage. The shortened spine and rib cage anomalies can cause serious breathing problems and recurring lung infections. These complications result in a 32% death rate in early childhood. Other complications of spondylothoracic dysostosis, include shortened stature (due to the spine and vertebral defects) and limited neck motion. Symptom and symptom severity may vary from patient to patient, however symptoms tend to be the worse for children who carry two "E230X" mutations in the MESP2 gene. Most patients with spondylothoracic dysostosis have normal intelligence and neurological problems are infrequent.
 Yes. Spondylothoracic dysostosis is caused by mutations in the MESP2 gene. It is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion.
 Many infants born with spondylothoracic dysostosis have difficulty breathing due to their small, malformed chests, and therefore are prone to repeated respiratory infections (pneumonia). As the infant grows, the chest is too small to accommodate the growing lungs, and as a result, life threatening complications may develop. Treatment usually consists of intensive medical care, including treatment of respiratory infections, bone surgery, and orthopedic treatment.
Spondylothoracic dysostosis is a condition characterized by the malformation of the bones of the spine and ribs. The bones of the spine (vertebrae) do not develop properly, which causes them to be misshapen and abnormally joined together (fused). The ribs are also fused at the part nearest the spine (posteriorly), which gives the rib cage its characteristic fan-like or "crab" appearance in x-rays. Affected individuals have short, rigid necks and short midsections because of the bone malformations. As a result, people with spondylothoracic dysostosis have short bodies but normal length arms and legs, called short-trunk dwarfism.  The spine and rib abnormalities cause other signs and symptoms of spondylothoracic dysostosis. Infants with this condition are born with a small chest that cannot expand adequately, often leading to life-threatening breathing problems. As the lungs expand, the narrow chest forces the muscle that separates the abdomen from the chest cavity (the diaphragm) down and the abdomen is pushed out. The increased pressure in the abdomen can cause a soft out-pouching around the lower abdomen (inguinal hernia) or belly-button (umbilical hernia).  Spondylothoracic dysostosis is sometimes called spondylocostal dysostosis, a similar condition with abnormalities of the spine and ribs. The two conditions have been grouped in the past, and both are referred to as Jarcho-Levin syndrome; however, they are now considered distinct conditions.
Spondylothoracic dysostosis affects about one in 200,000 people worldwide. However, it is much more common in people of Puerto Rican ancestry, affecting approximately one in 12,000 people.
The MESP2 gene provides instructions for a protein that plays a critical role in the development of vertebrae. Specifically, it is involved in separating vertebrae from one another during early development, a process called somite segmentation. Mutations in the MESP2 gene prevent the production of any protein or lead to the production of an abnormally short, nonfunctional protein. When the MESP2 protein is nonfunctional or absent, somite segmentation does not occur properly, which results in the malformation and fusion of the bones of the spine and ribs seen in spondylothoracic dysostosis.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of spondylothoracic dysostosis:  - Cleveland Clinic: Spine X-ray  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Spondylocostal Dysostosis, Autosomal Recessive   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care