The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Kniest like dysplasia lethal. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal diaphysis morphology 90% Abnormal form of the vertebral bodies 90% Abnormality of the clavicle 90% Hydrops fetalis 90% Limb undergrowth 90% Lymphedema 90% Macrocephaly 90% Malar flattening 90% Muscular hypotonia 90% Narrow chest 90% Osteoarthritis 90% Respiratory insufficiency 90% Short neck 90% Short stature 90% Short thorax 90% Spina bifida occulta 90% Abnormality of the helix 50% Arrhythmia 50% Atria septal defect 50% Brachydactyly syndrome 50% Cleft palate 50% Depressed nasal bridge 50% Low-set, posteriorly rotated ears 50% Proptosis 50% Abnormality of the pinna - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Breech presentation - Broad ribs - Coronal cleft vertebrae - Dumbbell-shaped long bone - Edema - Flared metaphysis - Flat face - Hypertelorism - Hypoplastic ilia - Hypoplastic vertebral bodies - Lethal short-limbed short stature - Low-set ears - Narrow mouth - Patent ductus arteriosus - Platyspondyly - Polyhydramnios - Premature birth - Protuberant abdomen - Relative macrocephaly - Rhizomelia - Short diaphyses - Short ribs - Skeletal dysplasia - Talipes equinovarus - Wide anterior fontanel - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Kniest dysplasia is a disorder of bone growth characterized by short stature (dwarfism) with other skeletal abnormalities and problems with vision and hearing.  People with Kniest dysplasia are born with a short trunk and shortened arms and legs. Adult height ranges from 42 inches to 58 inches. Affected individuals have abnormally large joints that can cause pain and restrict movement, limiting physical activity. These joint problems can also lead to arthritis. Other skeletal features may include a rounded upper back that also curves to the side (kyphoscoliosis), severely flattened bones of the spine (platyspondyly), dumbbell-shaped bones in the arms and legs, long and knobby fingers, and an inward- and upward-turning foot (clubfoot).  Individuals with Kniest dysplasia have a round, flat face with bulging and wide-set eyes. Some affected infants are born with an opening in the roof of the mouth called a cleft palate. Infants may also have breathing problems due to weakness of the windpipe. Severe nearsightedness (myopia) and other eye problems are common in Kniest dysplasia. Some eye problems, such as tearing of the back lining of the eye (retinal detachment), can lead to blindness. Hearing loss resulting from recurrent ear infections is also possible.
Kniest dysplasia is a rare condition; the exact incidence is unknown.
Kniest dysplasia is one of a spectrum of skeletal disorders caused by mutations in the COL2A1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that forms type II collagen. This type of collagen is found mostly in the clear gel that fills the eyeball (the vitreous) and in cartilage. Cartilage is a tough, flexible tissue that makes up much of the skeleton during early development. Most cartilage is later converted to bone, except for the cartilage that continues to cover and protect the ends of bones and is present in the nose and external ears. Type II collagen is essential for the normal development of bones and other connective tissues that form the body's supportive framework.  Most mutations in the COL2A1 gene that cause Kniest dysplasia interfere with the assembly of type II collagen molecules. Abnormal collagen prevents bones and other connective tissues from developing properly, which leads to the signs and symptoms of Kniest dysplasia.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Kniest dysplasia:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Kniest dysplasia  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Clubfoot  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Retinal Detachment  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Scoliosis   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care