Acromesomelic dysplasia describes a group of extremely rare, inherited, progressive skeletal conditions that result in a particular form of short stature, called short-limb dwarfism. The short stature is the result of unusually short forearms and forelegs (mesomelia) and abnormal shortening of the bones in the hands and feet (acromelia). At birth, the hands and feet may appear abnormally short and broad. Over time, the apparent disproportion becomes even more obvious, especially during the first years of life. Additional features may include: limited extension of the elbows and arms; progressive abnormal curvature of the spine; an enlarged head; and a slightly flattened midface. Acromesomelic dysplasia is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. There are different types of acromesomelic dysplasia, which are distinguished by their genetic cause. To read more about the different types, click on the links below. Acromesomelic dysplasia, Maroteaux type Acromesomelic dysplasia, Hunter-Thompson type Acromesomelic dysplasia, Grebe type
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Acromesomelic dysplasia Hunter Thompson type. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the ankles 90% Brachydactyly syndrome 90% Elbow dislocation 90% Micromelia 90% Neurological speech impairment 90% Short stature 90% Single transverse palmar crease 90% Tarsal synostosis 90% Abnormality of the hip bone 50% Abnormality of the wrist 50% Cognitive impairment 50% Limitation of joint mobility 50% Patellar dislocation 50% Scoliosis 50% Abnormally shaped carpal bones - Acromesomelia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cuboidal metacarpal - Distal femoral bowing - Hip dislocation - Hypoplasia of the radius - Hypoplasia of the ulna - Radial bowing - Severe short-limb dwarfism - Short foot - Short thumb - Short tibia - Shortening of all middle phalanges of the fingers - Shortening of all proximal phalanges of the fingers - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Acromesomelic dysplasia Maroteaux type. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal form of the vertebral bodies 50% Bowing of the long bones 50% Brachydactyly syndrome 50% Depressed nasal bridge 50% Dolichocephaly 50% Frontal bossing 50% Hyperlordosis 50% Joint hypermobility 50% Kyphosis 50% Limitation of joint mobility 50% Micromelia 50% Scoliosis 50% Short stature 50% Sprengel anomaly 50% Acromesomelia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Beaking of vertebral bodies - Broad finger - Broad metacarpals - Broad metatarsal - Broad phalanx - Cone-shaped epiphyses of the phalanges of the hand - Disproportionate short stature - Flared metaphysis - Hypoplasia of the radius - Joint laxity - Limited elbow extension - Long hallux - Lower thoracic kyphosis - Lumbar hyperlordosis - Ovoid vertebral bodies - Prominent forehead - Radial bowing - Redundant skin on fingers - Short metacarpal - Short metatarsal - Short nail - Short nose - Thoracolumbar interpediculate narrowness - Thoracolumbar kyphosis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.