The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal hair quantity 90% Delayed eruption of teeth 90% Depressed nasal ridge 90% Hypohidrosis 90% Microdontia 90% Frontal bossing 50% Anterior hypopituitarism 7.5% Hypertension 7.5% Short distal phalanx of finger 7.5% Type I diabetes mellitus 7.5% Abnormality of oral mucosa - Absent eyebrow - Absent nipple - Anhidrosis - Aplasia/Hypoplastia of the eccrine sweat glands - Brittle hair - Concave nail - Conical tooth - Depressed nasal bridge - Dry skin - Dysphonia - Eczema - Everted upper lip vermilion - Fever - Heat intolerance - Heterogeneous - Hoarse voice - Hypodontia - Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia - Hypoplasia of the maxilla - Hypoplastic nipples - Hypoplastic-absent sebaceous glands - Hypotrichosis - Periorbital hyperpigmentation - Periorbital wrinkles - Prominent supraorbital ridges - Respiratory difficulties - Short chin - Short nose - Soft skin - Sparse eyebrow - Sparse eyelashes - Taurodontia - Thick vermilion border - Thin skin - Underdeveloped nasal alae - X-linked recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) is a genetic skin disease. Common symptoms include sparse scalp and body hair, reduced ability to sweat, and missing teeth. HED is caused by mutations in the EDA, EDAR, or EDARADD genes. It may be inherited in an X-linked recessive, autosomal recessive, or autosomal dominant manner depending on the genetic cause of the condition. The X-linked form is the most common form. The forms have similar signs and symptoms, however the the autosomal dominant form tends to be the mildest. Treatment of hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia may include special hair care formulas or wigs, measures to prevent overheating, removal of ear and nose concretions, and dental evaluations and treatment (e.g., restorations, dental implants, or dentures).
 Yes. Genetic testing for hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia is available. In most cases, hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia can be diagnosed after infancy based upon the physical features in the affected child. Genetic testing may be ordered to confirm the diagnosis. Other reasons for testing may include to identify carriers or for prenatal diagnosis. Clinical testing is available for detection of disease causing mutations in the EDA, EDAR, and EDARADD genes. We recommend that you speak with a health care provider or a genetics professional to learn more about your testing options. The Genetic Testing Registry (GTR) provides information about the genetic tests for this condition. The intended audience for the GTR is health care providers and researchers. Patients and consumers with specific questions about a genetic test should contact a health care provider or a genetics professional.
 There is no specific treatment for HED. The condition is managed by treating the various symptoms. For patients with abnormal or no sweat glands, it is recommended that they live in places with air conditioning at home, school and work. In order to maintain normal body temperature, they should frequently drink cool liquids and wear cool clothing. Dental defects can be managed with dentures and implants. Artificial tears are used to prevent cornea damage for patients that do not produce enough tears. Surgery to repair a cleft palate is also helpful in improving speech and facial deformities.
Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with hypothyroidism and ciliary dyskinesia is a rare condition characterized by alopecia (hair loss); nail dystrophy (abnormal development of the nails); ophthalmic (eye-related) complications; thyroid dysfunction (primary hypothyroidism); hypohidrosis; ephelides (freckles); enteropathy (disease of the intestine); and respiratory tract infections due to ciliary dyskinesia. These features have lead to the acronym ANOTHER syndrome as an alternative name for the condition. The gene that causes the condition is currently unknown but it is thought to be inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment is generally symptomatic and supportive.
Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with hypothyroidism and ciliary dyskinesia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal hair quantity 90% Abnormality of the fingernails 90% Abnormality of the toenails 90% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the eyebrow 90% Behavioral abnormality 90% Delayed skeletal maturation 90% Fine hair 90% Hypohidrosis 90% Hypothyroidism 90% Recurrent respiratory infections 90% Short stature 90% Lacrimation abnormality 50% Melanocytic nevus 50% Abnormal respiratory motile cilium morphology - Abnormality of skin pigmentation - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Ciliary dyskinesia - Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia - Nail dysplasia - Primary hypothyroidism - Recurrent infections - Sparse eyebrow - Sparse scalp hair - Urticaria - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immune deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Dysgammaglobulinemia - Ectodermal dysplasia - Immunodeficiency - Recurrent infections - X-linked recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia is one of about 150 types of ectodermal dysplasia in humans. Before birth, these disorders result in the abnormal development of structures including the skin, hair, nails, teeth, and sweat glands.  Most people with hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia have a reduced ability to sweat (hypohidrosis) because they have fewer sweat glands than normal or their sweat glands do not function properly. Sweating is a major way that the body controls its temperature; as sweat evaporates from the skin, it cools the body. An inability to sweat can lead to a dangerously high body temperature (hyperthermia), particularly in hot weather. In some cases, hyperthermia can cause life-threatening medical problems.  Affected individuals tend to have sparse scalp and body hair (hypotrichosis). The hair is often light-colored, brittle, and slow-growing. This condition is also characterized by absent teeth (hypodontia) or teeth that are malformed. The teeth that are present are frequently small and pointed.  Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia is associated with distinctive facial features including a prominent forehead, thick lips, and a flattened bridge of the nose. Additional features of this condition include thin, wrinkled, and dark-colored skin around the eyes; chronic skin problems such as eczema; and a bad-smelling discharge from the nose (ozena).
Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia is the most common form of ectodermal dysplasia in humans. It is estimated to affect at least 1 in 17,000 people worldwide.
Mutations in the EDA, EDAR, and EDARADD genes cause hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia.  The EDA, EDAR, and EDARADD genes provide instructions for making proteins that work together during embryonic development. These proteins form part of a signaling pathway that is critical for the interaction between two cell layers, the ectoderm and the mesoderm. In the early embryo, these cell layers form the basis for many of the body's organs and tissues. Ectoderm-mesoderm interactions are essential for the formation of several structures that arise from the ectoderm, including the skin, hair, nails, teeth, and sweat glands.  Mutations in the EDA, EDAR, or EDARADD gene prevent normal interactions between the ectoderm and the mesoderm and impair the normal development of hair, sweat glands, and teeth. The improper formation of these ectodermal structures leads to the characteristic features of hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia.
Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia has several different inheritance patterns. Most cases are caused by mutations in the EDA gene, which are inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. A condition is considered X-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation must be present in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.  In X-linked recessive inheritance, a female with one altered copy of the gene in each cell is called a carrier. In about 70 percent of cases, carriers of hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia experience some features of the condition. These signs and symptoms are usually mild and include a few missing or abnormal teeth, sparse hair, and some problems with sweat gland function. Some carriers, however, have more severe features of this disorder.  Less commonly, hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia results from mutations in the EDAR or EDARADD gene. EDAR mutations can have an autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance, and EDARADD mutations have an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. Autosomal dominant inheritance means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Autosomal recessive inheritance means two copies of the gene in each cell are altered. Most often, the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive disorder are carriers of one copy of the altered gene but do not show signs and symptoms of the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Hypohidrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Autosomal dominant hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Autosomal recessive hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hypohidrotic X-linked ectodermal dysplasia  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Ectodermal dysplasia  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Ozena  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Sweating - absent   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care