The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spondylometaphyseal dysplasia type A4. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the hip bone 90% Micromelia 90% Platyspondyly 90% Short stature 90% Brachydactyly syndrome 50% Enlarged thorax 7.5% Limitation of joint mobility 7.5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Broad ischia - Costochondral joint sclerosis - Coxa valga - Disproportionate short-limb short stature - Dolichocephaly - Enlargement of the costochondral junction - Flat acetabular roof - Hypoplasia of the capital femoral epiphysis - Irregular capital femoral epiphysis - Irregular patellae - Metaphyseal irregularity - Metaphyseal sclerosis - Metaphyseal widening - Narrow greater sacrosciatic notches - Osteoporotic metatarsal - Osteoporotic tarsals - Ovoid vertebral bodies - Pectus carinatum - Sclerotic humeral metaphysis - Severe short stature - Spondylometaphyseal dysplasia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spondylometaphyseal dysplasia X-linked. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the nail - Anteverted nares - Coarse facial features - Depressed nasal bridge - Enlarged joints - Hip contracture - Hyperextensibility of the finger joints - Hypertelorism - Intellectual disability, mild - Knee flexion contracture - Kyphosis - Neurological speech impairment - Nystagmus - Pectus carinatum - Platyspondyly - Respiratory failure - Sclerosis of skull base - Severe short stature - Spondylometaphyseal dysplasia - Strabismus - Tapered finger - Thoracolumbar scoliosis - Wide nasal bridge - X-linked inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spondylometaphyseal dysplasia Algerian type. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Genu valgum 90% Micromelia 90% Myopia 90% Anterior rib cupping - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Bowed humerus - Carpal bone hypoplasia - Coxa vara - Flared femoral metaphysis - Hypoplasia of proximal radius - Hypoplastic pelvis - Kyphoscoliosis - Lumbar hyperlordosis - Metaphyseal dysplasia - Platyspondyly - Severe short stature - Short sacroiliac notch - Short tubular bones (hand) - Spondylometaphyseal dysplasia - Tibial metaphyseal irregularity - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spondylometaphyseal dysplasia Sedaghatian type. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Brachydactyly syndrome 90% Delayed skeletal maturation 90% Platyspondyly 90% Sprengel anomaly 90% Sudden cardiac death 90% Narrow chest 50% Accelerated skeletal maturation 7.5% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the corpus callosum 7.5% 11 pairs of ribs - Atria septal defect - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cone-shaped epiphyses of the phalanges of the hand - Cone-shaped metacarpal epiphyses - Cupped ribs - Delayed epiphyseal ossification - Depressed nasal bridge - Flared iliac wings - Flat acetabular roof - Focal lissencephaly - Iliac crest serration - Irregular tarsal bones - Large posterior fontanelle - Long fibula - Metaphyseal cupping - Metaphyseal irregularity - Muscular hypotonia - Narrow greater sacrosciatic notches - Porencephaly - Posteriorly rotated ears - Redundant skin - Rhizomelia - Short finger - Short long bone - Short metacarpal - Short neck - Short phalanx of finger - Short ribs - Short toe - Spondylometaphyseal dysplasia - Talipes equinovarus - Turricephaly - Widened sacrosciatic notch - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Axial spondylometaphyseal dysplasia is a genetic disorder of bone growth. The term axial means towards the center of the body. Sphondylos is a Greek term meaning vertebra. Metaphyseal dysplasia refers to abnormalities at the ends of long bones. Axial spondylometaphyseal dysplasia primarily affects the bones of the chest, pelvis, spine, upper arms and upper legs, and results in shortened stature. For reasons not well understood, this rare skeletal dysplasia is also associated with early and progressive vision loss. The underlying genetic cause of axial spondylometaphyseal dysplasia is currently unknown. It is thought to be inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion.
 Is surgery helpful? Can the vision problems be corrected? There is no specific treatment for axial spondylometaphyseal dysplasia. Symptoms such as lung infections, breathing difficulties, coxa vara, scoliosis, retinitis pigmentosa, and optic atrophy are managed individually. Specialists such as opthmologists, geneticists, and orthopedists work in concert in devloping an individualized treatment plan. We are unaware of any cases describing the use of growth hormone therapies for treatment of short stature caused by axial spondylometaphyseal dysplasia. Treatment of skeletal dysplasias with growth hormone therapy must be done with caution.  The Little People of America, Inc Web site lists articles on repiratory and breathing problems in people with skeletal dysplasias, including an article titled Breathing Problems Among Little People: When to Be Concerned. Detailed information related to the management of retinitis pigmentosa can be accessed through GeneReviews and the Treatment and Medication sections of Medscape Reference. Detailed information related to the management of coxa vara can also be found in the Treatment sections of a Medscape Reference review article on this condition. Johns Hopkins Department of Orthopedic Surgery offers a Patient Guide to Scoliosis. MedlinePlus.gov provides information on optic atrophy.  Further medical support resources can be found through the Little People of America, Inc.