Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) develops as a result of an infant's lungs becoming irritated or inflamed.
                
The lungs of premature infants are fragile and often aren't fully developed. They can easily be irritated or injured within hours or days of birth. Many factors can damage premature infants' lungs.
                
Ventilation
                
Newborns who have breathing problems or can't breathe on their own may need ventilator support. Ventilators are machines that use pressure to blow air into the airways and lungs.
                
Although ventilator support can help premature infants survive, the machine's pressure might irritate and harm the babies' lungs. For this reason, doctors only recommend ventilator support when necessary.
                
High Levels of Oxygen
                
Newborns who have breathing problems might need oxygen therapy (oxygen given through nasal prongs, a mask, or a breathing tube). This treatment helps the infants' organs get enough oxygen to work well.
                
However, high levels of oxygen can inflame the lining of the lungs and injure the airways. Also, high levels of oxygen can slow lung development in premature infants.
                
Infections
                
Infections can inflame the lungs. As a result, the airways narrow, which makes it harder for premature infants to breathe. Lung infections also increase the babies' need for extra oxygen and breathing support.
                
Heredity
                
Studies show that heredity may play a role in causing BPD. More studies are needed to confirm this finding.
The more premature an infant is and the lower his or her birth weight, the greater the risk of bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD).
                
Most infants who develop BPD are born more than 10 weeks before their due dates, weigh less than 2 pounds (about 1,000 grams) at birth, and have breathing problems. Infections that occur before or shortly after birth also can contribute to BPD.
                
The number of babies who have BPD is higher now than in the past. This is because of advances in care that help more premature infants survive.
                
Many babies who develop BPD are born with serious respiratory distress syndrome (RDS). However, some babies who have mild RDS or don't have RDS also develop BPD. These babies often have very low birth weights and one or more other conditions, such as patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) and sepsis.
                
PDA is a heart problem that occurs soon after birth in some babies. Sepsis is a serious bacterial infection in the bloodstream.
Many babies who develop bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) are born with serious respiratory distress syndrome (RDS). The signs and symptoms of RDS at birth are:
                
Rapid, shallow breathing
                
Sharp pulling in of the chest below and between the ribs with each breath
                
Grunting sounds
                
Flaring of the nostrils
                
Babies who have RDS are treated with surfactant replacement therapy. They also may need oxygen therapy (oxygen given through nasal prongs, a mask, or a breathing tube).
                
Shortly after birth, some babies who have RDS also are treated with nasal continuous positive airway pressure (NCPAP) or ventilators (machines that support breathing).
                
Often, the symptoms of RDS start to improve slowly after about a week. However, some babies get worse and need more oxygen or breathing support from NCPAP or a ventilator.
                
A first sign of BPD is when premature infantsusually those born more than 10 weeks earlystill need oxygen therapy by the time they reach their original due dates. These babies are diagnosed with BPD.
                
Infants who have severe BPD may have trouble feeding, which can lead to delayed growth. These babies also may develop:
                
Pulmonary hypertension (PH). PH is increased pressure in the pulmonary arteries. These arteries carry blood from the heart to the lungs to pick up oxygen.
                
Cor pulmonale. Cor pulmonale is failure of the right side of the heart. Ongoing high blood pressure in the pulmonary arteries and the lower right chamber of the heart causes this condition.
Infants who are born earlyusually more than 10 weeks before their due datesand still need oxygen therapy by the time they reach their original due dates are diagnosed with bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD).
                
BPD can be mild, moderate, or severe. The diagnosis depends on how much extra oxygen a baby needs at the time of his or her original due date. It also depends on how long the baby needs oxygen therapy.
                
To help confirm a diagnosis of BPD, doctors may recommend tests, such as:
                
Chest x ray. A chest x ray takes pictures of the structures inside the chest, such as the heart and lungs. In severe cases of BPD, this test may show large areas of air and signs of inflammation or infection in the lungs. A chest x ray also can detect problems (such as a collapsed lung) and show whether the lungs aren't developing normally.
                
Blood tests. Blood tests are used to see whether an infant has enough oxygen in his or her blood. Blood tests also can help determine whether an infection is causing an infant's breathing problems.
                
Echocardiography. This test uses sound waves to create a moving picture of the heart. Echocardiography is used to rule out heart defects or pulmonary hypertension as the cause of an infant's breathing problems
Taking steps to ensure a healthy pregnancy might prevent your infant from being born before his or her lungs have fully developed. These steps include:
                
Seeing your doctor regularly during your pregnancy
                
Following a healthy diet
                
Not smoking and avoiding tobacco smoke, alcohol, and illegal drugs
                
Controlling any ongoing medical conditions you have
                
Preventing infection
                
If your doctor thinks that you're going to give birth too early, he or she may give you injections of a corticosteroid medicine.
                
The medicine can speed up surfactant production in your baby. Surfactant is a liquid that coats the inside of the lungs. It helps keep them open so your infant can breathe in air once he or she is born.
                
Usually, within about 24 hours of your taking this medicine, the baby's lungs start making enough surfactant. This will reduce the infant's risk of respiratory distress syndrome (RDS), which can lead to bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD).
                
Corticosteroids also can help your baby's lungs, brain, and kidneys develop more quickly while he or she is in the womb.
                
If your baby does develop RDS, it will probably be fairly mild. If the RDS isn't mild, BPD will likely develop.