The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Dyssynergia cerebellaris myoclonica. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Generalized seizures 7.5% Abnormality of the dentate nucleus - Abnormality of the mitochondrion - Ataxia - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Intention tremor - Myoclonus - Pallidal degeneration - Ragged-red muscle fibers - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Dyssynergia Cerebellaris Myoclonica refers to a collection of rare, degenerative, neurological disorders characterized by epilepsy, cognitive impairment, myoclonus, and progressive ataxia. Symptoms include seizures, tremor, and reduced muscle coordination. Onset of the disorder generally occurs in early adulthood. Tremor may begin in one extremity and later spread to involve the entire voluntary muscular system. Arms are usually more affected than legs. Some of the cases are due to mitochondrial abnormalities.
Treatment of Dyssynergia Cerebellaris Myoclonica is symptomatic. Myoclonus and seizures may be treated with drugs like valproate.
The progression of the disorder is usually 10 years or longer.
The NINDS supports a broad range of research on neurodegenerative disorders such as Dyssynergia Cerebellaris Myoclonica. The goals of this research are to find ways to prevent, treat, and cure these kinds of disorders.