The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spondylometaphyseal dysplasia with cone-rod dystrophy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of retinal pigmentation 90% Abnormality of color vision 50% Astigmatism 50% Hyperlordosis 50% Hypermetropia 50% Myopia 50% Nystagmus 50% Photophobia 50% Scoliosis 50% Visual impairment 50% Brachydactyly syndrome 7.5% Limitation of joint mobility 7.5% Abnormality of macular pigmentation - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cone/cone-rod dystrophy - Coxa vara - Cupped ribs - Dental malocclusion - Femoral bowing - Hypoplastic inferior ilia - Joint stiffness - Metaphyseal cupping - Metaphyseal irregularity - Metaphyseal widening - Narrow greater sacrosciatic notches - Ovoid vertebral bodies - Postnatal growth retardation - Progressive visual loss - Recurrent otitis media - Rhizomelia - Severe platyspondyly - Short finger - Short metacarpal - Spondylometaphyseal dysplasia - Tibial bowing - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Cone-rod dystrophy X-linked 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Cone/cone-rod dystrophy - Progressive cone degeneration - X-linked inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Cone-rod dystrophy 6. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Childhood onset - Cone/cone-rod dystrophy - Peripheral visual field loss - Reduced visual acuity - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Cone-rod dystrophy 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of color vision - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Blindness - Chorioretinal atrophy - Cone/cone-rod dystrophy - Constriction of peripheral visual field - Nyctalopia - Peripheral visual field loss - Reduced visual acuity - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Cone-rod dystrophies (CRDs) are a group of inherited eye disorders that affect both the cone and rod cells of the retina (photosenstitive receptor cells). In contrast to rod-cone dystrophies, individuals experience deterioration of the cone cells more severely than the rod cells. Initial signs and symptoms typically include decreased visual acuity when looking straight ahead (central vision loss); loss of color perception; and an abnormal sensitivity to light (photophobia). These signs are usually followed by progressive loss of peripheral vision and night blindness. Most cases occur due to mutations in any one of several genes, and CRDs can be inherited as autosomal recessive, autosomal dominant, X-linked or mitochondrial (maternally-inherited) traits. CRDs are usually non-syndromic, but they may also be part of several syndromes. Currently, there is no therapy that stops progression of the disease or restores vision; management aims at slowing the process, treating complications and helping individuals cope with the social and psychological impact of blindness.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Cone-rod dystrophy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of retinal pigmentation 90% Nyctalopia 90% Photophobia 90% Abnormality of color vision 50% Visual impairment 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Currently, there is no therapy that stops the evolution of cone-rod dystrophy or restores vision. There are a few treatment options, such as light avoidance and the use of low-vision aids that may help to slow down the degenerative process. It is important that people with cone-rod dystrophy recieve support and resources to help them cope with the social and psychological impact of vision loss.
Cone-rod dystrophy is a group of related eye disorders that causes vision loss, which becomes more severe over time. These disorders affect the retina, which is the layer of light-sensitive tissue at the back of the eye. In people with cone-rod dystrophy, vision loss occurs as the light-sensing cells of the retina gradually deteriorate.  The first signs and symptoms of cone-rod dystrophy, which often occur in childhood, are usually decreased sharpness of vision (visual acuity) and increased sensitivity to light (photophobia). These features are typically followed by impaired color vision (dyschromatopsia), blind spots (scotomas) in the center of the visual field, and partial side (peripheral) vision loss. Over time, affected individuals develop night blindness and a worsening of their peripheral vision, which can limit independent mobility. Decreasing visual acuity makes reading increasingly difficult and most affected individuals are legally blind by mid-adulthood. As the condition progresses, individuals may develop involuntary eye movements (nystagmus).  There are more than 30 types of cone-rod dystrophy, which are distinguished by their genetic cause and their pattern of inheritance: autosomal recessive, autosomal dominant, or X-linked (each of which is described below). Additionally, cone-rod dystrophy can occur alone without any other signs and symptoms or it can occur as part of a syndrome that affects multiple parts of the body.
Cone-rod dystrophy is estimated to affect 1 in 30,000 to 40,000 individuals.
Mutations in approximately 30 genes are known to cause cone-rod dystrophy. Approximately 20 of these genes are associated with the form of cone-rod dystrophy that is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Mutations in the ABCA4 gene are the most common cause of autosomal recessive cone-rod dystrophy, accounting for 30 to 60 percent of cases. At least 10 genes have been associated with cone-rod dystrophy that is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. Mutations in the GUCY2D and CRX genes account for about half of these cases. Changes in at least two genes cause the X-linked form of the disorder, which is rare.  The genes associated with cone-rod dystrophy play essential roles in the structure and function of specialized light receptor cells (photoreceptors) in the retina. The retina contains two types of photoreceptors, rods and cones. Rods are needed for vision in low light, while cones provide vision in bright light, including color vision.  Mutations in any of the genes associated with cone-rod dystrophy lead to a gradual loss of rods and cones in the retina. The progressive degeneration of these cells causes the characteristic pattern of vision loss that occurs in people with cone-rod dystrophy. Cones typically break down before rods, which is why sensitivity to light and impaired color vision are usually the first signs of the disorder. (The order of cell breakdown is also reflected in the condition name.) Night vision is disrupted later, as rods are lost.  Some of the genes associated with cone-rod dystrophy are also associated with other eye diseases, including a group of related eye disorders called rod-cone dystrophy. Rod-cone dystrophy has signs and symptoms similar to those of cone-rod dystrophy. However, rod-cone dystrophy is characterized by deterioration of the rods first, followed by the cones, so night vision is affected before daylight and color vision. The most common form of rod-cone dystrophy is a condition called retinitis pigmentosa.
Cone-rod dystrophy is usually inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.  Less frequently, this condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most of these cases, an affected person has one parent with the condition.  Rarely, cone-rod dystrophy is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. The genes associated with this form of the condition are located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. Females with one copy of the altered gene have mild vision problems, such as decreased visual acuity. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of cone-rod dystrophy:  - Cleveland Clinic: Eye Examinations: What to Expect  - Genetic Testing Registry: CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY, AIPL1-RELATED  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cone-rod dystrophy  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cone-rod dystrophy 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cone-rod dystrophy 10  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cone-rod dystrophy 11  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cone-rod dystrophy 12  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cone-rod dystrophy 13  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cone-rod dystrophy 15  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cone-rod dystrophy 16  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cone-rod dystrophy 17  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cone-rod dystrophy 18  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cone-rod dystrophy 19  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cone-rod dystrophy 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cone-rod dystrophy 20  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cone-rod dystrophy 21  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cone-rod dystrophy 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cone-rod dystrophy 5  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cone-rod dystrophy 6  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cone-rod dystrophy 7  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cone-rod dystrophy 8  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cone-rod dystrophy 9  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cone-rod dystrophy X-linked 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cone-rod dystrophy, X-linked 1  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Color Vision Test  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Visual Acuity Test  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Visual Field Test   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care