The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Corneal endothelial dystrophy type 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Congenital corneal dystrophy - Opacification of the corneal stroma - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Most cases of corneal endothelial dystrophy type 2 are caused by homozygous mutations in the SLC4A11 gene. The condition is transmitted in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that two unaffected parents each carry one copy of a gene mutation for the condition. Neither parent will show signs or symptoms of the condition because two copies are needed for the condition to occur. There have been several families with corneal endothelial dystrophy type 2 where no mutation was found in the SLC4A11 gene. To find laboratories offering genetic testing to confirm a diagnosis, please visit the Tests and Diagnosis section of the Web site. http://rarediseases.info.nih.gov/gard/6196/ched2/resources/12
Lattice corneal dystrophy type 3A is rare condition that affects the cornea. It is characterized primarily by protein clumps in the clear, outer covering of the eye which cloud the cornea and impair vision. Affected people also experience recurrent corneal erosion (separation of certain layers of the cornea), which is associated with severe pain and sensitivity to bright light. Lattice corneal dystrophy type 3A is caused by changes (mutations) in the TGFBI gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. The condition is usually treated surgically.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Lattice corneal dystrophy type 3A. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Corneal erosion - Lattice corneal dystrophy - Reduced visual acuity - Visual impairment - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar degeneration and corneal dystrophy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Cognitive impairment 90% EEG abnormality 90% Hemiplegia/hemiparesis 90% Incoordination 90% Opacification of the corneal stroma 90% Visual impairment 90% Abnormality of movement 50% Hyperlordosis 50% Hypertonia 50% Low-set, posteriorly rotated ears 50% Ptosis 50% Scoliosis 50% Triangular face 50% Abnormality of metabolism/homeostasis - Ataxia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Corneal dystrophy - Intellectual disability - Severe visual impairment - Spinocerebellar tract degeneration - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Macular dystrophy, corneal type 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of metabolism/homeostasis - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Corneal dystrophy - Juvenile onset - Macular dystrophy - Photophobia - Punctate opacification of the cornea - Recurrent corneal erosions - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Groenouw type I corneal dystrophy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Cataract - Granular corneal dystrophy - Nodular corneal dystrophy - Punctate corneal dystrophy - Strabismus - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Corneal dystrophy of Bowman layer type 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Corneal dystrophy - Corneal erosion - Opacification of the corneal stroma - Photophobia - Strabismus - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Lattice corneal dystrophy is a type of stromal dystrophy. It is characterized by the build up of protein fibers (i.e., amyloid) in the stroma.  Symptoms may include corneal erosions, decreased vision, photosensitivity, and eye pain. Most cases of lattice dystrophy are caused by mutations in the TGFBI gene.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Lattice corneal dystrophy type 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Lattice corneal dystrophy - Progressive visual loss - Recurrent corneal erosions - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Lattice corneal dystrophy type I is an eye disorder that affects the clear, outer covering of the eye called the cornea. The cornea must remain clear for an individual to see properly; however, in lattice corneal dystrophy type I, protein clumps known as amyloid deposits cloud the cornea, which leads to vision impairment. The cornea is made up of several layers of tissue, and in lattice corneal dystrophy type I, the deposits form in the stromal layer. The amyloid deposits form as delicate, branching fibers that create a lattice pattern.  Affected individuals often have recurrent corneal erosions, which are caused by separation of particular layers of the cornea from one another. Corneal erosions are very painful and can cause sensitivity to bright light (photophobia). Lattice corneal dystrophy type I is usually bilateral, which means it affects both eyes. The condition becomes apparent in childhood or adolescence and leads to vision problems by early adulthood.
Lattice corneal dystrophy type I is one of the most common disorders in a group of conditions that are characterized by protein deposits in the cornea (corneal dystrophies); however, it is still a rare condition. The prevalence of lattice corneal dystrophy type I is unknown.
Lattice corneal dystrophy type I is caused by mutations in the TGFBI gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is found in many tissues throughout the body, including the cornea. The TGFBI protein is part of the extracellular matrix, an intricate network that forms in the spaces between cells and provides structural support to tissues. The protein is thought to play a role in the attachment of cells to one another (cell adhesion) and cell movement (migration).  The TGFBI gene mutations involved in lattice corneal dystrophy type I change single protein building blocks (amino acids) in the TGFBI protein. Mutated TGFBI proteins abnormally clump together and form amyloid deposits. However, it is unclear how the changes caused by the gene mutations induce the protein to form deposits.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person has one parent with the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of lattice corneal dystrophy type I:  - American Foundation for the Blind: Living with Vision Loss  - Genetic Testing Registry: Lattice corneal dystrophy Type I  - Merck Manual Home Health Edition: Diagnosis of Eye Disorders: Slit-Lamp Examination   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Lattice corneal dystrophy type II is characterized by an accumulation of protein clumps called amyloid deposits in tissues throughout the body. The deposits frequently occur in blood vessel walls and basement membranes, which are thin, sheet-like structures that separate and support cells in many tissues. Amyloid deposits lead to characteristic signs and symptoms involving the eyes, nerves, and skin that worsen with age.  The earliest sign of this condition, which is usually identified in a person's twenties, is accumulation of amyloid deposits in the cornea (lattice corneal dystrophy). The cornea is the clear, outer covering of the eye. It is made up of several layers of tissue, and in lattice corneal dystrophy type II, the amyloid deposits form in the stromal layer. The amyloid deposits form as delicate, branching fibers that create a lattice pattern. Because these protein deposits cloud the cornea, they often lead to vision impairment. In addition, affected individuals can have recurrent corneal erosions, which are caused by separation of particular layers of the cornea from one another. Corneal erosions are very painful and can cause sensitivity to bright light (photophobia). Amyloid deposits and corneal erosions are usually bilateral, which means they affect both eyes.  As lattice corneal dystrophy type II progresses, the nerves become involved, typically starting in a person's forties. It is thought that the amyloid deposits disrupt nerve function. Dysfunction of the nerves in the head and face (cranial nerves) can cause paralysis of facial muscles (facial palsy); decreased sensations in the face (facial hypoesthesia); and difficulty speaking, chewing, and swallowing. Dysfunction of the nerves that connect the brain and spinal cord to muscles and to sensory cells that detect sensations such as touch, pain, and heat (peripheral nerves) can cause loss of sensation and weakness in the limbs (peripheral neuropathy). Peripheral neuropathy usually occurs in the lower legs and arms, leading to muscle weakness, clumsiness, and difficulty sensing vibrations.  The skin is also commonly affected in people with lattice corneal dystrophy type II, typically beginning in a person's forties. People with this condition may have thickened, sagging skin, especially on the scalp and forehead, and a condition called cutis laxa, which is characterized by loose skin that lacks elasticity. The skin can also be dry and itchy. Because of loose skin and muscle paralysis in the face, individuals with lattice corneal dystrophy type II can have a facial expression that appears sad.
Lattice corneal dystrophy type II is a rare condition; however, the prevalence is unknown. While this condition can be found in populations worldwide, it was first described in Finland and is more common there.
Lattice corneal dystrophy type II is caused by mutations in the GSN gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called gelsolin. This protein is found throughout the body and helps regulate the formation of the network of protein filaments that gives structure to cells (the cytoskeleton). Mutations that cause lattice corneal dystrophy type II change a single protein building block (amino acid) in the gelsolin protein. The altered gelsolin protein is broken down differently than the normal protein, which results in an abnormal gelsolin protein fragment that is released from the cell. These protein fragments clump together and form amyloid deposits, which lead to the signs and symptoms of lattice corneal dystrophy type II.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Although a mutation in one copy of the gene can cause the disorder, people with mutations in both copies of the gene have more severe signs and symptoms.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of lattice corneal dystrophy type II:  - American Foundation for the Blind: Living with Vision Loss  - Genetic Testing Registry: Meretoja syndrome  - Merck Manual Home Health Edition: Diagnosis of Eye Disorders: Slit-Lamp Examination   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care