Ear infections are the most common reason parents bring their child to a doctor. Three out of four children will have at least one ear infection by their third birthday. Adults can also get ear infections, but they are less common.    The infection usually affects the middle ear and is called otitis media. The tubes inside the ears become clogged with fluid and mucus. This can affect hearing, because sound cannot get through all that fluid.    If your child isn't old enough to say "My ear hurts," here are a few things to look for       - Tugging at ears    - Crying more than usual    - Fluid draining from the ear    - Trouble sleeping    - Balance difficulties    - Hearing problems       Your health care provider will diagnose an ear infection by looking inside the ear with an instrument called an otoscope.    Often, ear infections go away on their own. Your health care provider may recommend pain relievers. Severe infections and infections in young babies may require antibiotics.     Children who get infections often may need surgery to place small tubes inside their ears. The tubes relieve pressure in the ears so that the child can hear again.    NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders
Your ear has three main parts: outer, middle and inner. You use all of them in hearing. Sound waves come in through your outer ear. They reach your middle ear, where they make your eardrum vibrate. The vibrations are transmitted through three tiny bones, called ossicles, in your middle ear. The vibrations travel to your inner ear, a snail-shaped organ. The inner ear makes the nerve impulses that are sent to the brain. Your brain recognizes them as sounds. The inner ear also controls balance.    A variety of conditions may affect your hearing or balance:       - Ear infections are the most common illness in infants and young children.    - Tinnitus, a roaring in your ears, can be the result of loud noises, medicines or a variety of other causes.    - Meniere's disease may be the result of fluid problems in your inner ear; its symptoms include tinnitus and dizziness.    - Ear barotrauma is an injury to your ear because of changes in barometric (air) or water pressure.       Some ear disorders can result in hearing disorders and deafness.