The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Blepharoptosis myopia ectopia lentis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Ectopia lentis 90% Glaucoma 90% Myopia 90% Abnormality of the fingernails 50% Palpebral edema 50% Abnormality of retinal pigmentation 7.5% Abnormality of the helix 7.5% Iris coloboma 7.5% Prominent occiput 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Congenital ptosis - Increased axial globe length - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Isolated ectopia lentis (IEL) is a genetic disorder that affects the positioning of the lens in the eyes. In individuals with IEL, the lens in one or both of the eyes is off-center. Symptoms of IOL usually present in childhood and may include vision problems such as nearsightedness (myopia), blurred vision (astigmatism), clouding of the lenses (cataracts), and increased pressure in the eyes (glaucoma). In some individuals, IEL can progress to retinal detachment (tearing of the back lining of the eye). IEL is caused by mutations in either the FBN1 or ADAMTSL4 gene. When caused by a mutation in the FBN1 gene, IEL is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. When caused by a mutation in the ADAMTSL4 gene, IEL is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. The primary goal of treatment is preventing amblyopia (lazy eye) through early correction of astigmatism. Surgical intervention including lensectomy (removal of the lens) may be considered in cases where vision is significantly affected.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Isolated ectopia lentis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Corneal dystrophy 90% Ectopia lentis 90% Flat cornea 90% Astigmatism 50% Glaucoma 50% Abnormality of the pupil 7.5% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the lens 7.5% Disproportionate tall stature 7.5% Hypermetropia 7.5% Lens coloboma 7.5% Limitation of joint mobility 7.5% Retinal detachment 7.5% Visual impairment 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Isolated ectopia lentis is a condition that affects the eyes, specifically the positioning of the lens. The lens is a clear structure at the front of the eye that helps focus light. In people with isolated ectopia lentis, the lens in one or both eyes is not centrally positioned as it should be but is off-center (displaced). Isolated ectopia lentis usually becomes apparent in childhood. The lens may drift further off-center over time.  Vision problems are common in isolated ectopia lentis. Affected individuals often have nearsightedness (myopia) and can have an irregular curvature of the lens or a structure that covers the front of the eye (the cornea), which causes blurred vision (astigmatism). They may also develop clouding of the lenses (cataracts) or increased pressure in the eyes (glaucoma) at an earlier age than other adults. In a small number of people with isolated ectopia lentis, tearing of the back lining of the eye (retinal detachment) occurs, which can lead to further vision problems and possible blindness.  In individuals with isolated ectopia lentis, each eye can be affected differently. In addition, the eye problems vary among affected individuals, even those within the same family.  Ectopia lentis is classified as isolated when it occurs alone without signs and symptoms affecting other body systems. Ectopia lentis can also be classified as syndromic, when it is part of a syndrome that affects multiple parts of the body. Ectopia lentis is a common feature of genetic syndromes such as Marfan syndrome and Weill-Marchesani syndrome.
The prevalence of isolated ectopia lentis is unknown. In Denmark, an estimated 6.4 per 100,000 individuals have ectopia lentis, but a large proportion of these cases (about 75 percent) are syndromic.
Mutations in the FBN1 or ADAMTSL4 gene cause isolated ectopia lentis. These genes provide instructions for making proteins that are necessary for the formation of threadlike filaments called microfibrils. Microfibrils provide support to many tissues, including the lenses of the eyes, which are held in position by these filaments.  Mutations in the FBN1 or ADAMTSL4 gene impair protein function and lead to a decrease in microfibril formation or result in the formation of impaired microfibrils. Without functional microfibrils to anchor the lens in its central position at the front of the eye, the lens becomes displaced. The displaced lens cannot focus light correctly, contributing to the vision problems that are common in people with isolated ectopia lentis.
When isolated ectopia lentis is caused by mutations in the FBN1 gene, it is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.  When isolated ectopia lentis is caused by mutations in the ADAMTSL4 gene, it is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of isolated ectopia lentis:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: ADAMTSL4-Related Eye Disorders  - Genetic Testing Registry: Ectopia lentis, isolated autosomal recessive  - Genetic Testing Registry: Ectopia lentis, isolated, autosomal dominant   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care