The uterus, or womb, is the place where a baby grows when a woman is pregnant. If you have an ectopic pregnancy, the fertilized egg grows in the wrong place, outside the uterus, usually in the fallopian tubes. The result is usually a miscarriage.    Ectopic pregnancy can be a medical emergency if it ruptures. Signs of ectopic pregnancy include       - Abdominal pain    - Shoulder pain    - Vaginal bleeding    - Feeling dizzy or faint       Get medical care right away if you have these signs. Doctors use drugs or surgery to remove the ectopic tissue so it doesn't damage your organs. Many women who have had ectopic pregnancies go on to have healthy pregnancies later.    Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health
An ectopic kidney is a birth defect in which a kidney is located below, above, or on the opposite side of its usual position. About one in 900 people has an ectopic kidney.1
During fetal development, a babys kidneys first appear as buds inside the pelvisthe bowl-shaped bone that supports the spine and holds up the digestive, urinary, and reproductive organsnear the bladder. As the kidneys develop, they move gradually toward their usual position in the back near the rib cage. Sometimes, one of the kidneys remains in the pelvis or stops moving before it reaches its usual position. In other cases, the kidney moves higher than the usual position. Rarely does a child have two ectopic kidneys.
                
Most kidneys move toward the rib cage, but one may cross over so that both kidneys are on the same side of the body. When a crossover occurs, the two kidneys often grow together and become fused.
                
Factors that may lead to an ectopic kidney include
                
- poor development of a kidney bud  - a defect in the kidney tissue responsible for prompting the kidney to move to its usual position  - genetic abnormalities  - the mother being sick or being exposed to an agent, such as a drug or chemical, that causes birth defects
An ectopic kidney may not cause any symptoms and may function normally, even though it is not in its usual position. Many people have an ectopic kidney and do not discover it until they have tests done for other reasons. Sometimes, a health care provider may discover an ectopic kidney after feeling a lump in the abdomen during an examination. In other cases, an ectopic kidney may cause abdominal pain or urinary problems.
Possible complications of an ectopic kidney include problems with urine drainage from that kidney. Sometimes, urine can even flow backwards from the bladder to the kidney, a problem called vesicoureteral reflux (VUR). More information about VUR is provided in the NIDDK health topic, Vesicoureteral Reflux.
                
Abnormal urine flow and the placement of the ectopic kidney can lead to various problems:
                
- Infection. Normally, urine flow washes out bacteria and keeps them from growing in the kidneys and urinary tract. When a kidney is out of the usual position, urine may get trapped in the ureter or in the kidney itself. Urine that remains in the urinary tract gives bacteria the chance to grow and spread. Symptoms of a urinary tract infection include frequent or painful urination, back or abdominal pain, fever, chills, and cloudy or foul-smelling urine.  - Stones. Urinary stones form from substances found in the urine, such as calcium and oxalate. When urine remains in the urinary tract for too long, the risk that these substances will have time to form stones is increased. Symptoms of urinary stones include extreme pain in the back, side, or pelvis; blood in the urine; fever or chills; vomiting; and a burning feeling during urination.  - Kidney damage. If urine backs up all the way to the kidney, damage to the kidney can occur. As a result, the kidney cant filter wastes and extra water from the blood. One ectopic kidney, even when it has no function, will not cause kidney failure. The other kidney can usually perform the functions of two healthy kidneys. Total kidney failure happens only in rare cases when both kidneys are damaged.  - Trauma. If the ectopic kidney is in the lower abdomen or pelvis, it may be susceptible to injury from blunt trauma. People with an ectopic kidney who want to participate in body contact sports may want to wear protective gear.
No treatment for an ectopic kidney is needed if urinary function is normal and no blockage of the urinary tract is present.
                
If tests show an obstruction, surgery may be needed to correct the position of the kidney to allow for better drainage of urine. Reflux can be corrected by surgery to alter the ureter or injection of a gellike liquid into the bladder wall near the opening of the ureter.
                
If extensive kidney damage has occurred, surgery may be needed to remove the kidney. As long as the other kidney is working properly, losing one kidney should have no adverse health effects. More information is provided in the NIDDK health topic, Solitary Kidney.
                
With the right testing and treatment, if needed, an ectopic kidney should cause no serious long-term health problems.
Eating, diet, and nutrition have not been shown to play a role in causing or preventing an ectopic kidney.