Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a group of inherited disorders that weaken connective tissues. Connective tissues are proteins that support skin, bones, blood vessels, and other organs.     EDS usually affects your skin, joints and blood vessel walls. Symptoms include       -  Loose joints     -  Fragile, small blood vessels     -  Abnormal scar formation and wound healing     -  Soft, velvety, stretchy skin that bruises easily        There are several types of EDS. They can range from mild to life-threatening. About 1 in 5,000 people has EDS. There is no cure. Treatment involves managing symptoms, often with medicines and physical therapy. It also includes learning how to protect your joints and prevent injuries.
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), kyphoscoliosis type is an inherited connective tissue disorder that is caused by defects in a protein called collagen. Common signs and symptoms include hyperextensible skin that is fragile and bruises easily; joint hypermobility; severe hypotonia at birth; progressive kyphoscoliosis (kyphosis and scoliosis); and fragility of the sclera. EDS, kyphoscoliosis type is caused by changes (mutations) in the PLOD1 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment is focused on preventing serious complications and relieving associated signs and symptoms.
 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), kyphoscoliosis type is caused by changes (mutations) in the PLOD1 gene. This gene encodes an enzyme that helps process molecules which allow collagen to form stable interactions with one another. Collagen is a protein that provides structure and strength to connective tissues throughout the body. Mutations in the PLOD1 gene lead to reduced levels of functional enzyme which disrupt networks of collagen throughout the body. This weakens the connective tissues and leads to the characteristic signs and symptoms associated with EDS, kyphoscoliosis type.
 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, kyphoscoliosis type is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that to be affected, a person must have a mutation in both copies of the responsible gene in each cell. The parents of an affected person usually each carry one mutated copy of the gene and are referred to as carriers. Carriers typically do not show signs or symptoms of the condition. When two carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be a carrier like each of the parents, and a 25% chance to not have the condition and not be a carrier.
 A diagnosis of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), kyphoscoliosis type is typically based on the presence of characteristic signs and symptoms. The following tests may then be recommended to confirm the diagnosis: Urine tests and/or a skin biopsy to detect deficiencies in certain enzymes that are important for collagen formation Genetic testing for a change (mutation) in the PLOD1 gene
 The treatment of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), kyphoscoliosis type is focused on preventing serious complications and relieving associated signs and symptoms. For example, physical therapy may be recommended in children with hypotonia and delayed motor development. This treatment can also help improve joint stability. Assistive devices such as braces may be necessary depending on the severity of joint instability. Depending on the severity of the kyphoscoliosis (kyphosis and scoliosis), surgery may be necessary. Because EDS, kyphoscoliosis type is associated with fragile skin with abnormal wound healing, affected people, especially children, may need to wear protective bandages or pads over exposed areas, such as the knees, shins, and forehead. Regular follow-up may be recommended to check for development or progression of abnormalities of the eyes, cardiovascular system, and other parts of the body. GeneReview's Web site offers more specific information regarding the treatment and management of EDS, kyphoscoliosis type. Please click on the link to access this resource. Please speak to your healthcare provider if you have any questions about your personal medical management plan.
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a group of inherited connective tissue disorders that is caused by abnormalities in the structure, production, and/or processing of collagen. There are 6 major forms of EDS: hypermobility type, classic type, vascular type, kyphoscoliosis type, arthrochalasia type, and dermatosparaxis type. Although other forms of the condition exist, they are extremely rare and are not well-characterized. The signs and symptoms of EDS vary by type and range from mildly loose joints to life-threatening complications. Features shared by many types include joint hypermobility and soft, velvety skin that is highly elastic (stretchy) and bruises easily. Changes (mutations) in a variety of genes may lead to EDS; however, the underlying genetic cause in some families is unknown. Depending on the subtype, EDS may be inherited in an autosomal dominant or an autosomal recessive manner. There is no specific cure for EDS. The treatment and management is focused on preventing serious complications and relieving associated signs and symptoms.
 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome can be caused by changes (mutations) in several different genes (COL5A1, COL5A2, COL1A1, COL3A1, TNXB, PLOD1, COL1A2, and ADAMTS2). However, the underlying genetic cause is unknown in some families. Mutations in these genes usually alter the structure, production, and/or processing of collagen or proteins that interact with collagen. Collagen provides structure and strength to connective tissues throughout the body. A defect in collagen can weaken connective tissues in the skin, bones, blood vessels, and organs resulting in the features of the disorder.
 The inheritance pattern of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) varies by subtype. The arthrochalasia, classic, hypermobility, and vascular forms of the disorder usually have an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. This means that to be affected, a person only needs a change (mutation) in one copy of the responsible gene in each cell. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from an affected parent. Other cases may result from new (de novo) mutations in the gene. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. A person with one of these subtypes has a 50% chance with each pregnancy of passing along the altered gene to his or her child. The dermatosparaxis and kyphoscoliosis types of EDS are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. This means that to be affected, a person must have a mutation in both copies of the responsible gene in each cell. The parents of an affected person usually each carry one mutated copy of the gene and are referred to as carriers. Carriers typically do not show signs or symptoms of the condition. When two carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be a carrier like each of the parents, and a 25% chance to not have the condition and not be a carrier.
 A diagnosis of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is typically based on the presence of characteristic signs and symptoms. Depending on the subtype suspected, some of the following tests may be ordered to support the diagnosis: Collagen typing performed on a skin biopsy may aid in the diagnosis of vascular type, arthrochalasia type, and dermatosparaxis type. Collagen is a tough, fiber-like protein that makes up about a third of body protein. It is part of the structure of tendons, bones, and connective tissues. People with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome often have abnormalities of certain types of collagen. Genetic testing is available for many subtypes of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome; however, it is not an option for most families with the hypermobility type. Imaging studies such as CT scan, MRI, ultrasound, and angiography may be useful in identifying certain features of the condition. Urine tests to detect deficiencies in certain enzymes that are important for collagen formation may be helpful in diagnosing kyphoscoliosis type.
 There is no specific cure for Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS). The treatment and management is focused on preventing serious complications and relieving associated signs and symptoms. Because the features of EDS vary by subtype, management strategies differ slightly. For more specific information on the treatment of each subtype, please click on the links below: Hypermobility type Classic type Vascular type Kyphoscoliosis type Arthrochalasia type Dermatosparaxis type Please speak to your healthcare provider if you have any questions about your personal medical management plan.
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), dermatosparaxis type is an inherited connective tissue disorder that is caused by defects in a protein called collagen. Common symptoms include soft, doughy skin that is extremely fragile; saggy, redundant skin, especially on the face; hernias; and mild to severe joint hypermobility. EDS, dermatosparaxis type is caused by changes (mutations) in the ADAMTS2 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment and management is focused on preventing serious complications and relieving associated signs and symptoms.
 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), dermatosparaxis type is caused by changes (mutations) in the ADAMTS2 gene. This gene encodes an enzyme that helps process several types of "procollagen molecules" (precursors of collagen). Collagen is a protein that provides structure and strength to connective tissues throughout the body. Mutations in ADAMTS2 lead to reduced levels of functional enzyme which interferes with the proper processing of procollagens. As a result, networks of collagen are not assembled properly. This weakens connective tissues and causes the many signs and symptoms associated with EDS, dermatosparaxis type.
 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, dermatosparaxis type is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that to be affected, a person must have a mutation in both copies of the responsible gene in each cell. The parents of an affected person usually each carry one mutated copy of the gene and are referred to as carriers. Carriers typically do not show signs or symptoms of the condition. When two carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be a carrier like each of the parents, and a 25% chance to not have the condition and not be a carrier.
 A diagnosis of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), dermatosparaxis type is typically based on the presence of characteristic signs and symptoms. Genetic testing for a change (mutation) in the ADAMTS2 gene and/or a skin biopsy can then be ordered to confirm the diagnosis.
 The treatment of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), dermatosparaxis type is focused on preventing serious complications and relieving associated signs and symptoms. For example, physical therapy may be recommended in children with moderate to severe joint hypermobility. Assistive devices such as braces, wheelchairs, or scooters may also be necessary depending on the severity of joint instability. Hernias may be treated with surgery. Because EDS, dermatosparaxis type is associated with extremely fragile skin, affected people, especially children, may need to use protective bandages or pads over exposed areas, such as the knees, shins, and forehead. Heavy exercise and contact sports may also need to be avoided due to skin fragility and easy bruising. Please speak to your healthcare provider if you have any questions about your personal medical management plan.
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome progeroid type is a genetic disorder of the connective tissue, which is the material between the cells of the body that gives tissues form and strength. The disorder primarily affects the skin, hair, and skeletal system. Symptoms usually show up by childhood or adolescence. Like people with other types of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, individuals with the progeroid form have unusually flexible joints, loose elastic skin, and easy scarring. Features that are unique to this type include sparse scalp hair and eyebrows, and loose elastic skin on the face; these features cause affected individuals to look older than their age. Additional symptoms may include bone weakness, weak muscle tone, mild intellectual disability, and delayed growth in affected children. The progeroid type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is caused by mutations in the B4GALT7 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome progeroid type is caused by changes (mutations) in both of an individual's copies of the B4GALT7 gene, which is located on chromosome 5. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme that is involved in the production of collagen (the main protein in connective tissue). When not enough enzyme is made by the B4GALT7 genes, collagen is not formed correctly in connective tissue. The symptoms of the disorder are caused by weak connective tissue. Researchers are still studying exactly how mutations in the B4GALT7 gene cause the signs and symptoms of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome progeroid type.
 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome progeroid type is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. This means that an individual must have two non-functional copies of the B4GALT7 gene to be affected with the condition. One copy is inherited from each parent. If an individual has only one non-functional B4GALT7 gene (such as each parent), he or she is a "carrier". Carriers do not typically show any signs or symptoms of a recessive condition. When two carriers for a recessive condition have children, with each pregnancy there is a 25% (1 in 4) risk for the child to be affected, a 50%  (1 in 2) risk for the child to be a carrier (like each parent) and a 25% risk that the child will be unaffected and also not be a carrier. An individual with a recessive condition will generally have unaffected children, except in the rare circumstance where his or her partner is a carrier of a nonfunctional B4GALT7 gene.
 Individuals with Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome progeroid type can benefit from a variety of treatments depending on their symptoms. Affected children with weak muscle tone and delayed development might benefit from physiotherapy to improve muscle strength and coordination. Affected individuals with joint pain might benefit from anti-inflammatory drugs. Lifestyle changes or precautions during exercise or intense physical activity may be advised to reduce the chance of accidents to the skin and bone. It is recommended that affected individuals discuss treatment options with their healthcare provider.
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), vascular type is an inherited connective tissue disorder that is caused by defects in a protein called collagen. It is generally considered the most severe form of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Common symptoms include thin, translucent skin; easy bruising; characteristic facial appearance; and fragile arteries, muscles and internal organs. EDS, vascular type is caused by changes (mutations) in the COL3A1 gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Treatment and management is focused on preventing serious complications and relieving associated signs and symptoms.
 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), vascular type is caused by changes (mutations) in the COL3A1 gene. The COL3A1 gene provides instructions for making a component of type III collagen. Collagen is a protein that provides structure and strength to connective tissues throughout the body. Type III collagen, specifically, is found in tissues such as the skin, lungs, intestinal walls, and the walls of blood vessels. Mutations in the COL3A1 gene lead to defects in type III collagen molecules and/or reduced amounts of functional type III collagen. This causes the many signs and symptoms associated with EDS, vascular type.
 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), vascular type is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that to be affected, a person only needs a change (mutation) in one copy of the responsible gene in each cell. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from an affected parent. Other cases may result from new (de novo) mutations in the gene. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. A person with EDS, vascular type has a 50% chance with each pregnancy of passing along the altered gene to his or her child.
 A diagnosis of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), vascular type is typically based on the presence of characteristic signs and symptoms. Genetic testing for a change (mutation) in the COL3A1 gene can then be ordered to confirm the diagnosis. Collagen typing performed on a skin biopsy may be recommended if genetic testing is inconclusive. Collagen is a tough, fiber-like protein that makes up about a third of body protein. It is part of the structure of tendons, bones, and connective tissues. People with EDS, vascular type have abnormalities in type III collagen.
 The treatment and management of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), vascular type is focused on relieving associated signs and symptoms and preventing serious complications. For example, people with EDS, vascular type have tissue fragility that puts them at high risk for rupture of arteries, muscles and internal organs. It is, therefore, important to seek immediate medical attention for any sudden, unexplained pain as emergency surgery may be indicated. Pregnant women with EDS, vascular type should be followed by a maternal-fetal specialists at a high-risk perinatal center. Periodic screening may be recommended to diagnose aneurysms or other problems that may not be associated with obvious symptoms. People with the EDS, vascular type should also minimize risk of injury by avoiding contact sports, heavy lifting, and weight training. Elective surgery is also discouraged. GeneReview's Web site offers more specific information about the treatment and management of EDS, vascular type. Please click on the link to access this resource. Please speak to your healthcare provider if you have any questions about your personal medical management plan.
Although it is difficult to estimate the overall frequency of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, the combined prevalence of all types of this condition may be about 1 in 5,000 individuals worldwide. The hypermobility and classical forms are most common; the hypermobility type may affect as many as 1 in 10,000 to 15,000 people, while the classical type probably occurs in 1 in 20,000 to 40,000 people.  Other forms of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome are very rare. About 30 cases of the arthrochalasia type and about 60 cases of the kyphoscoliosis type have been reported worldwide. About a dozen infants and children with the dermatosparaxis type have been described. The vascular type is also rare; estimates vary widely, but the condition may affect about 1 in 250,000 people.