Hepatic encephalopathy is a syndrome observed in some patients with cirrhosis. It is defined as a spectrum of neuropsychiatric abnormalities in patients with liver dysfunction, when other known brain disease has been excluded. Signs and symptoms may be debilitating, and they can begin mildly and gradually, or occur suddenly and severely. They may include personality or mood changes, intellectual impairment, abnormal movements, a depressed level of consciousness, and other symptoms. There are several theories regarding the exact cause, but development of the condition is probably at least partially due to the effect of substances that are toxic to nerve tissue (neurotoxic), which are typically present with liver damage and/or liver disease. Treatment depends upon the severity of mental status changes and upon the certainty of the diagnosis.
 Hepatic encephalopathy is not an inherited condition, so an individual who has it cannot pass it on to his/her children. It is brought on by chronic liver failure, particularly in alcoholics with cirrhosis. Although there are many theories and possibilities regarding what exactly causes HE, it is thought that one of the main causes is the accumulation of ammonia in the blood, which the liver, damaged by alcoholic liver disease, cannot remove. Researchers have found that ammonia alters the expression of certain genes; the genes that may be affected carry instructions for brain proteins. When the instructions in these genes are not "followed" correctly by the body due to the altered expression of the genes, the cells in the brain can no longer function normally, which may contribute to the signs and symptoms of HE. However, the genes themselves are not changed in such a way that these changes are passed down to an individual's children.
Encephalopathy is a term for any diffuse disease of the brain that alters brain function or structure. Encephalopathy may be caused by infectious agent (bacteria, virus, or prion), metabolic or mitochondrial dysfunction, brain tumor or increased pressure in the skull, prolonged exposure to toxic elements (including solvents, drugs, radiation, paints, industrial chemicals, and certain metals), chronic progressive trauma, poor nutrition, or lack of oxygen or blood flow to the brain. The hallmark of encephalopathy is an altered mental state. Depending on the type and severity of encephalopathy, common neurological symptoms are progressive loss of memory and cognitive ability, subtle personality changes, inability to concentrate, lethargy, and progressive loss of consciousness. Other neurological symptoms may include myoclonus (involuntary twitching of a muscle or group of muscles), nystagmus (rapid, involuntary eye movement), tremor, muscle atrophy and weakness, dementia, seizures, and loss of ability to swallow or speak. Blood tests, spinal fluid examination, imaging studies, electroencephalograms, and similar diagnostic studies may be used to differentiate the various causes of encephalopathy.
Treatment is symptomatic and varies, according to the type and severity of the encephalopathy. Your physician can provide specific instructions for proper care and treatment. Anticonvulsants may be prescribed to reduce or halt any seizures. Changes to diet and nutritional supplements may help some patients. In severe cases, dialysis or organ replacement surgery may be needed.
Treating the underlying cause of the disorder may improve symptoms. However, the encephalopathy may cause permanent structural changes and irreversible damage to the brain. Some encephalopathies can be fatal.