Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like episodes (MELAS) affects many parts of the body, particularly the brain and nervous system (encephalo-) and muscles (myopathy). Symptoms typically begin in childhood and may include muscle weakness and pain, recurrent headaches, loss of appetite, vomiting, and seizures. Most affected individuals experience stroke-like episodes beginning before age 40. People with MELAS can also have a buildup of lactic acid in their bodies that can lead to vomiting, abdominal pain, fatigue, muscle weakness, and difficulty breathing. The genes associated with MELAS are located in mitochondrial DNA and therefore follow a maternal inheritance pattern (also called mitochondrial inheritance). MELAS can be inherited from the mother only, because only females pass mitochondrial DNA to their children. In some cases, MELAS results from a new mutation that was not inherited from a person's mother.
MELAS is caused by mutations in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and is therefore transmitted by maternal inheritance (also called mitochondrial inheritance). This type of inheritance applies to all conditions caused by genes in mtDNA. Mitochondria are structures in each cell that turn molecules into energy, and each contain a small amount of DNA. Only egg cells (not sperm cells) contribute mitochondria to offspring, so only females can pass on mitochondrial mutations to their children. Conditions resulting from mutations in mtDNA can appear in every generation of a family and can affect both males and females. In most cases, people with MELAS inherit an altered mitochondrial gene from their mother. Less commonly, the condition results from a new mutation in a mitochondrial gene and occurs in an individual with no history of MELAS in the family.
What are the genetic testing options for mitochondrial encephalomyopathy lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes (MELAS)? Genetic testing for a particular condition is typically available from only a few clinical laboratories because these conditions are rare and the tests are ordered infrequently. It is not uncommon to send DNA samples to a laboratory in another state, or even to laboratories in Canada or Europe. Genetic tests are more complicated than standard blood tests and are usually much more expensive. Due to the high cost of these tests, insurance companies may or may not provide coverage. Doctors sometimes write a letter of medical necessity to the insurance company stating why a particular test is needed, which sometimes pursuades the insurance company to cover the test. These letters state the medical benefits that a person would receive from a test, and how the test would alter a person's medical care. GeneTests lists the names of laboratories that perform genetic testing. This resource lists the contact information for the clinical laboratories conducting genetic testing for MELAS. Another option is to participate in a research study that is performing genetic testing. While the cost of testing is often covered by the research funding, the tests may be more experimental and less accurate. In addition, results may not be reported to participants, or it may take a much longer time to receive any results. To access the contact information for the research laboratory performing genetic testing for mitochondrial disorders (including MELAS), click here.  Please note:  Most of the laboratories listed through GeneTests do not accept direct contact from patients and their families; therefore, if you are interested in learning more, you will need to work with a health care provider or a genetics professional.
Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like episodes (MELAS) is a condition that affects many of the body's systems, particularly the brain and nervous system (encephalo-) and muscles (myopathy). The signs and symptoms of this disorder most often appear in childhood following a period of normal development, although they can begin at any age. Early symptoms may include muscle weakness and pain, recurrent headaches, loss of appetite, vomiting, and seizures. Most affected individuals experience stroke-like episodes beginning before age 40. These episodes often involve temporary muscle weakness on one side of the body (hemiparesis), altered consciousness, vision abnormalities, seizures, and severe headaches resembling migraines. Repeated stroke-like episodes can progressively damage the brain, leading to vision loss, problems with movement, and a loss of intellectual function (dementia).  Most people with MELAS have a buildup of lactic acid in their bodies, a condition called lactic acidosis. Increased acidity in the blood can lead to vomiting, abdominal pain, extreme tiredness (fatigue), muscle weakness, and difficulty breathing. Less commonly, people with MELAS may experience involuntary muscle spasms (myoclonus), impaired muscle coordination (ataxia), hearing loss, heart and kidney problems, diabetes, and hormonal imbalances.
The exact incidence of MELAS is unknown. It is one of the more common conditions in a group known as mitochondrial diseases. Together, mitochondrial diseases occur in about 1 in 4,000 people.
MELAS can result from mutations in one of several genes, including MT-ND1, MT-ND5, MT-TH, MT-TL1, and MT-TV. These genes are found in the DNA of cellular structures called mitochondria, which convert the energy from food into a form that cells can use. Although most DNA is packaged in chromosomes within the nucleus, mitochondria also have a small amount of their own DNA, known as mitochondrial DNA or mtDNA.  Some of the genes related to MELAS provide instructions for making proteins involved in normal mitochondrial function. These proteins are part of a large enzyme complex in mitochondria that helps convert oxygen, fats, and simple sugars to energy. Other genes associated with this disorder provide instructions for making molecules called transfer RNAs (tRNAs), which are chemical cousins of DNA. These molecules help assemble protein building blocks called amino acids into full-length, functioning proteins within mitochondria.  Mutations in a particular transfer RNA gene, MT-TL1, cause more than 80 percent of all cases of MELAS. These mutations impair the ability of mitochondria to make proteins, use oxygen, and produce energy. Researchers have not determined how changes in mtDNA lead to the specific signs and symptoms of MELAS. They continue to investigate the effects of mitochondrial gene mutations in different tissues, particularly in the brain.
This condition is inherited in a mitochondrial pattern, which is also known as maternal inheritance. This pattern of inheritance applies to genes contained in mtDNA. Because egg cells, but not sperm cells, contribute mitochondria to the developing embryo, children can only inherit disorders resulting from mtDNA mutations from their mother. These disorders can appear in every generation of a family and can affect both males and females, but fathers do not pass traits associated with changes in mtDNA to their children.  In most cases, people with MELAS inherit an altered mitochondrial gene from their mother. Less commonly, the disorder results from a new mutation in a mitochondrial gene and occurs in people with no family history of MELAS.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of MELAS:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: MELAS  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Mitochondrial Disorders Overview  - Genetic Testing Registry: Juvenile myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis AND stroke  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Lactic acidosis  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Stroke   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care