Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy is an epilepsy syndrome characterized by myoclonic jerks (quick jerks of the arms or legs), generalized tonic-clonic seizures (GTCSs), and sometimes, absence seizures. The seizures of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy often occur when people first awaken in the morning. Seizures can be triggered by lack of sleep, extreme fatigue, stress, or alcohol consumption. Onset typically occurs around adolesence in otherwise healthy children. The exact cause of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy remains unknown, but genetics likely plays a role. Although patients usually require lifelong treatment with anticonvulsants, their overall prognosis is generally good.
 The exact cause of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy remains unknown. It is not associated with conditions such as head trauma, brain tumor, or encephalitis. Several families have specific mutations in various genes and a complex mode of inheritance. In individuals with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy, symptoms can be precipitated by:  Sleep deprivation Psychological stress Alcohol and drug use Noncompliance of medication Photic stimulation Menses Time of day - Usually mornings
 Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy is an inherited disorder (about a third of patients with this condition have a positive family history of epilepsy), but the exact mode of inheritance is not clear. A number of studies have indicated that juvenile myoclonic epilepsy is an autosomal dominant condition (i.e. 50% risk of inheritance). However, it exhibits incomplete penetrance, which means that some individuals who inherit the juvenile myoclonic epilepsy gene or genes do not express clinical juvenile myoclonic epilepsy. The children of these individuals who have the gene but do not exhibit symptoms may still inherit the genes and express clinically observable disease. Due to the complex nature of inheritance with this condition, you may benefit from consulting with a genetics professional. This type of healthcare provider can provide you with additional information about diagnosis, natural history, treatment, mode of inheritance, and genetic risks to other family members. To find a genetics clinic, we recommend that you contact your primary doctor for a referral. Click here to learn more about genetic consultations.
 Avoidance of precipitating events such as alcohol use and sleep deprivation may be useful but is not sufficient to control the seizures of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy. Medical therapy with anticonvulsants is typically needed and well tolerated. The majority of patients can be well controlled on a single drug, most commonly valproic acid or lamotrigine or possibly topiramate. More details about the medications used to treat juvenile myoclonic epilepsy can be found at the following link. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/1185061-treatment
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Epilepsy juvenile absence. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Absence seizures - Autosomal dominant inheritance - EEG with spike-wave complexes (>3.5 Hz) - Generalized myoclonic seizures - Generalized tonic-clonic seizures on awakening - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy is a condition characterized by recurrent seizures (epilepsy). This condition begins in childhood or adolescence, usually between ages 12 and 18, and lasts into adulthood. The most common type of seizure in people with this condition is myoclonic seizures, which cause rapid, uncontrolled muscle jerks. People with this condition may also have generalized tonic-clonic seizures (also known as grand mal seizures), which cause muscle rigidity, convulsions, and loss of consciousness. Sometimes, affected individuals have absence seizures, which cause loss of consciousness for a short period that appears as a staring spell. Typically, people with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy develop the characteristic myoclonic seizures in adolescence, then develop generalized tonic-clonic seizures a few years later. Although seizures can happen at any time, they occur most commonly in the morning, shortly after awakening. Seizures can be triggered by a lack of sleep, extreme tiredness, stress, or alcohol consumption.
Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy affects an estimated 1 in 1,000 people worldwide. Approximately 5 percent of people with epilepsy have juvenile myoclonic epilepsy.
The genetics of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy are complex and not completely understood. Mutations in one of several genes can cause or increase susceptibility to this condition. The most studied of these genes are the GABRA1 gene and the EFHC1 gene, although mutations in at least three other genes have been identified in people with this condition. Many people with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy do not have mutations in any of these genes. Changes in other, unidentified genes are likely involved in this condition.  A mutation in the GABRA1 gene has been identified in several members of a large family with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy. The GABRA1 gene provides instructions for making one piece, the alpha-1 (1) subunit, of the GABAA receptor protein. The GABAA receptor acts as a channel that allows negatively charged chlorine atoms (chloride ions) to cross the cell membrane. After infancy, the influx of chloride ions creates an environment in the cell that inhibits signaling between nerve cells (neurons) and prevents the brain from being overloaded with too many signals. Mutations in the GABRA1 gene lead to an altered 1 subunit and a decrease in the number of GABAA receptors available. As a result, the signaling between neurons is not controlled, which can lead to overstimulation of neurons. Researchers believe that the overstimulation of certain neurons in the brain triggers the abnormal brain activity associated with seizures.  Mutations in the EFHC1 gene have been associated with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy in a small number of people. The EFHC1 gene provides instructions for making a protein that also plays a role in neuron activity, although its function is not completely understood. The EFHC1 protein is attached to another protein that acts as a calcium channel. This protein allows positively charged calcium ions to cross the cell membrane. The movement of these ions is critical for normal signaling between neurons. The EFHC1 protein is thought to help regulate the balance of calcium ions inside the cell, although the mechanism is unclear. In addition, studies show that the EFHC1 protein may be involved in the self-destruction of cells. EFHC1 gene mutations reduce the function of the EFHC1 protein. Researchers suggest that this reduction causes an increase in the number of neurons and disrupts the calcium balance. Together, these effects may lead to overstimulation of neurons and trigger seizures.
The inheritance pattern of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy is not completely understood. When the condition is caused by mutations in the GABRA1 gene, it is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. The inheritance pattern of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy caused by mutations in the EFHC1 gene is not known.  Although juvenile myoclonic epilepsy can run in families, many cases occur in people with no family history of the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Epilepsy with grand mal seizures on awakening  - Genetic Testing Registry: Epilepsy, idiopathic generalized 10  - Genetic Testing Registry: Epilepsy, idiopathic generalized 9  - Genetic Testing Registry: Epilepsy, juvenile myoclonic 5  - Genetic Testing Registry: Epilepsy, juvenile myoclonic 9  - Genetic Testing Registry: Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy  - Merck Manual Consumer Version: Seizure Disorders   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care