Northern epilepsy is a rare condition that affects the nervous system. Signs and symptoms of the condition generally develop between ages 5 and 10 years and may include recurrent seizures, mild intellectual disability, and motor abnormalities (i.e. problems with coordination and balance). Some affected people may also experience decreased visual acuity. Northern epilepsy is caused by changes (mutations) in the CLN8 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment options are limited to therapies that can help relieve some of the symptoms.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Northern epilepsy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Ataxia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cerebellar atrophy - Cerebral atrophy - Curvilinear intracellular accumulation of autofluorescent lipopigment storage material - Delayed speech and language development - Developmental regression - EEG abnormality - Increased neuronal autofluorescent lipopigment - Myoclonus - Progressive visual loss - Seizures - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Northern epilepsy appears to affect only individuals of Finnish ancestry, particularly those from the Kainuu region of northern Finland. Approximately 1 in 10,000 individuals in this region have the condition.
Mutations in the CLN8 gene cause Northern epilepsy. The CLN8 gene provides instructions for making a protein whose function is not well understood. The CLN8 protein is thought to play a role in transporting materials in and out of a cell structure called the endoplasmic reticulum. The endoplasmic reticulum is involved in protein production, processing, and transport. Based on the structure of the CLN8 protein, it may also help regulate the levels of fats (lipids) in cells.  A single CLN8 gene mutation has been identified to cause Northern epilepsy. Nearly all affected individuals have this mutation in both copies of the CLN8 gene in each cell. The effects of this mutation on protein function are unclear. Unlike other forms of NCL that result in the accumulation of large amounts of fatty substances called lipopigments in cells, contributing to cell death, Northern epilepsy is associated with very little lipopigment buildup. People with Northern epilepsy do have mild brain abnormalities resulting from cell death, but the cause of this brain cell death is unknown. It is also unclear how changes in the CLN8 protein and a loss of brain cells cause the neurological problems associated with Northern epilepsy.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Northern epilepsy:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Neuronal Ceroid-Lipofuscinoses  - Genetic Testing Registry: Ceroid lipofuscinosis, neuronal, 8, northern epilepsy variant   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care