Erythema nodosum (EN) is a skin condition in which red bumps (nodules) form on the shins. Less commonly, the nodules form on other areas of the body such as the thighs and forearms. The lesions begin as firm, hot, red, painful lumps and progress to a purplish color. EN is a type of inflammatory disorder affecting the layer of fat under the skin (panniculitis). Other symptoms that may accompany the skin findings include the following: fever, a general feeling of being ill. joint aches, and swelling of the affected area. In many cases, EN is presumed to be a delayed reaction to antigens associated with various infections, drugs, and certain systemic diseases. In many cases, however, EN has no identifiable cause (idiopathic); in these cases, clinical follow-up is needed to rule out certain conditions including inflammatory bowel disease, sarcoidosis, lymphoma, and Behcet's disease. Treatment may include rest, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS), steroids, hot or cold compresses, potassium iodide solution, and supportive bandages or compression stockings. Symptoms usually resolve within six weeks, but EN may become a chronic disorder lasting for months and, occasionally, for years. Approximately 30% cases of idiopathic EN may last more than 6 months.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Familial erythema nodosum. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Erythema - Erythema nodosum - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.