Symptoms of Dry Eye Dry eye symptoms may include any of the following. - stinging or burning of the eye   - a sandy or gritty feeling as if something is in the eye   - episodes of excess tears following very dry eye periods   - a stringy discharge from the eye   - pain and redness of the eye   - episodes of blurred vision  - heavy eyelids   - inability to cry when emotionally stressed   - uncomfortable contact lenses   - decreased ability to read, work on the computer, or do any activity that requires you to use your eyes for long periods of time   - eye fatigue.  stinging or burning of the eye a sandy or gritty feeling as if something is in the eye episodes of excess tears following very dry eye periods a stringy discharge from the eye pain and redness of the eye episodes of blurred vision heavy eyelids inability to cry when emotionally stressed uncomfortable contact lenses decreased ability to read, work on the computer, or do any activity that requires you to use your eyes for long periods of time eye fatigue. If you have symptoms that you think could result from dry eye, consult an eye care professional to get an accurate diagnosis of the condition and begin treatment.  Diagnosing Dry Eye Diagnosis of dry eye requires a comprehensive eye evaluation. Your eye care professional will ask you about your symptoms, your health (conditions for which you are treated, medications that you take), your eye history (use of contact lenses, past refractive or other eye surgery), and aspects of your daily environment (exposure to environmental allergens or occupational hazards). He or she will test your vision, check your eye pressure, examine your eyelids and front eye structures, and, if necessary, may dilate the pupils to examine the inside of the eye. Your eye care professional may order a tearing test to find out if you are making enough tears to keep your eyes moist. In one type of test, called a Schirmers test, the doctor may measure your tear production by placing strips of blotting paper under your lower eyelids, usually done after numbing the eye with anesthetic drops. After a few minutes, the doctor removes the strips and measures the amount of tear production.
Dry eye occurs when the eye does not produce tears properly, or when the tears are of poor quality and dry up quickly. The eyes need tears for overall eye health and clear vision. Dry eye can last a short time or it can be an ongoing condition. It can include a variety of symptoms, such as discomfort and pain. Your eyes may sting and burn and you may have redness and a sandy or gritty feeling, as if something is in your eye. You may have blurry vision and you may feel eye fatigue. Having dry eyes can make it harder to do some activities, such as using a computer or reading for a long period of time, and it can make it hard to be in dry places, such as on an airplane. (This short video discusses causes, symptoms, and treatments for dry eye.)
Most people with dry eye will not have serious problems, but severe dry eye may lead to inflammation, ulcers, or scars on the cornea, and some loss of vision. Permanent loss of vision from dry eye is uncommon.
Diagnosis of dry eye requires a comprehensive eye evaluation. Your eye care professional will ask you about your symptoms, your overall health (conditions for which you are treated, medications that you take), your eye history (use of contact lenses, past refractive or other eye surgery), and aspects of your daily environment (exposure to environmental allergens or occupational hazards). He or she will test your vision, check your eye pressure, examine your eyelids and front eye structures, and if necessary may dilate the pupils to examine the inside of the eye. Your eye care professional may order a tearing test to find out if your eyes are producing enough tears to keep them moist. In one type of test, called a Schirmers test, the doctor may measure your tear production by placing strips of blotting paper under your lower eyelids, usually done after numbing the eye with anesthetic drops. After a few minutes, the doctor removes the strips and measures the amount of tear production.
Dry eye can be a temporary or ongoing condition, so treatments can be short term or may extend over long periods of time. The goal of treatment is to keep the eyes moist and relieve symptoms. Talk to your doctor to rule out other conditions that can cause dry eye, such as Sjgren's syndrome. You may need to treat these conditions. If dry eye results from taking a medication, your doctor may recommend switching to a medication that does not cause dry eye as a side effect. Here are treatments for dry eye. Medication. Cyclosporine, an anti-inflammatory medication, is a prescription eye drop available to treat certain kinds of dry eye. In people with certain kinds of dry eye, it may decrease damage to the cornea, increase basic tear production, and reduce symptoms of dry eye. It may take three to six months of twice-a-day dosages for the medication to work. Some patients with severe dry eye may need to use corticosteroid eye drops that decrease inflammation under close observation by an eye care professional.  Nutritional Supplements. In some patients with dry eye, supplements of omega-3 fatty acids (especially DHA and EPA) may decrease symptoms of irritation. Talk with your eye care professional or your primary medical doctor about whether this is an option for you. Lenses. If dry eye is a result of wearing contact lens for too long, your eye care practitioner may recommend another type of lens or reducing the number of hours you wear your lenses. In the case of severe dry eye, your eye care professional may advise you not to wear contact lenses at all. Punctal plugs. Another option to increase the available tears on the eye surface is to plug the drainage holes, small circular openings at the inner corners of the eyelids where tears drain from the eye into the nose. Lacrimal plugs, also called punctal plugs, can be inserted painlessly by an eye care professional. These plugs are made of silicone or collagen. These plugs can be temporary or permanent. Punctal cautery. In some cases, a simple surgery called punctal cautery is recommended to permanently close the drainage holes. The procedure works similarly to installing punctal plugs, but cannot be reversed.
Your eyes can get infections from bacteria, fungi, or viruses. Eye infections can occur in different parts of the eye and can affect just one eye or both. Two common eye infections are       -  Conjunctivitis - also known as pinkeye. Conjunctivitis is often due to an infection. Children frequently get it, and it is very contagious.     - Stye - a bump on the eyelid that happens when bacteria from your skin get into the hair follicle of an eyelash.       Symptoms of eye infections may include redness, itching, swelling, discharge, pain, or problems with vision. Treatment depends on the cause of the infection and may include compresses, eye drops, creams, or antibiotics.
Some eye problems are minor and don't last long. But some can lead to a permanent loss of vision.    Common eye problems include       - Refractive errors    - Cataracts - clouded lenses    - Glaucoma - a disorder caused by damage to the optic nerve    - Retinal disorders - problems with the nerve layer at the back of the eye    - Macular degeneration - a disease that destroys sharp, central vision    - Diabetic eye problems    - Conjunctivitis - an infection also known as pinkeye       Your best defense is to have regular checkups, because eye diseases do not always have symptoms. Early detection and treatment could prevent vision loss. See an eye care professional right away if you have a sudden change in vision, if everything looks dim, or if you see flashes of light. Other symptoms that need quick attention are pain, double vision, fluid coming from the eye, and inflammation.    NIH: National Eye Institute
The structure of your face helps protect your eyes from injury. Still, injuries can damage your eye, sometimes severely enough that you could lose your vision. Most eye injuries are preventable. If you play sports or work in certain jobs, you may need protection.    The most common type of injury happens when something irritates the outer surface of your eye. Certain jobs such as industrial jobs or hobbies such as carpentry make this type of injury more likely. It's also more likely if you wear contact lenses.    Chemicals or heat can burn your eyes. With chemicals, the pain may cause you to close your eyes. This traps the irritant next to the eye and may cause more damage. You should wash out your eye right away while you wait for medical help.
Cancer of the eye is uncommon. It can affect the outer parts of the eye, such as the eyelid, which are made up of muscles, skin and nerves. If the cancer starts inside the eyeball it's called intraocular cancer. The most common intraocular cancers in adults are melanoma and lymphoma. The most common eye cancer in children is retinoblastoma, which starts in the cells of the retina. Cancer can also spread to the eye from other parts of the body.    Treatment for eye cancer varies by the type and by how advanced it is. It may include surgery, radiation therapy, freezing or heat therapy, or laser therapy.