Fabry disease is an inherited disorder that results from the buildup of a particular type of fat in the body's cells, called globotriaosylceramide or GL-3. Fabry disease affects many parts of the body. Signs and symptoms may include episodes of pain, particularly in the hands and feet (acroparesthesias); clusters of small, dark red spots on the skin called angiokeratomas; a decreased ability to sweat (hypohidrosis); cloudiness of the front part of the eye (corneal opacity); and hearing loss. Potentially severe complications can include progressive kidney damage, heart attack, and stroke. Milder forms of the disorder may appear later in life and affect only the heart or kidneys. Fabry disease is caused by mutations in the GLA gene and is inherited in an X-linked manner. Treatment may include enzyme replacement therapy (ERT); pain medications, ACE inhibitors; and chronic hemodialysis or renal transplantation for end stage renal disease.
How  Fabry disease is inherited in an X-linked pattern, which means that the gene that causes the condition is located on the X chromosome. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one mutated copy of the gene is enough to cause symptoms of the condition. Because females have two copies of the X chromosome, one mutated copy of the gene in each cell usually leads to less severe symptoms in females than in males, or may cause no symptoms at all.
 Management for Fabry disease may include treatment of specific signs and symptoms as well as prevention of secondary complications. Treatment for acroparesthesias (pain in the extremities) may include diphenylhydantoin and/or carbamazepine to reduce the frequency and severity of pain crises; or gabapentin, which has also been shown to improve pain. Renal insufficiency may be treated with ACE inhibitors. Experts recommend ACE inhibitors for all individuals with evidence of kidney involvement, especially to reduce protein in the urine (proteinuria). Chronic hemodialysis and/or renal transplantation have become lifesaving procedures for affected individuals. The transplanted kidney remains free of the harmful fatty substance (glycosphingolipid) deposition. Therefore, successful renal transplantation corrects the renal function. Transplantation of kidneys from carriers for Fabry disease should be avoided because these kidneys may already be affected. All potential donors that are relatives of the affected individual should be evaluated for their genetic status to make sure they are not affected or a carrier. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) is generally used to improve some of the the signs and symptoms associated with Fabry disease and to stabilize organ function. Experts have recommended that ERT be started as early as possible in all males with Fabry disease (including children and those with end stage renal disease (ESRD) undergoing dialysis and renal transplantation) and in female carriers that are significantly affected. All of these individuals are at high risk for cardiac, cerebrovascular (interruption of blood supply to the brain), and neurologic complications, such as transient ischemic attacks and strokes. The role of ERT in the long-term prevention of renal, cardiac, and central nervous system (CNS) involvement is unproven; however, because ERT can stabilize organ function in individuals with more advanced disease, some have suggested starting ERT in early disease stages. This might include starting ERT when an individual is asymptomatic. Prevention of complications such as renovascular disease (conditions affecting the blood vessels of the kidneys), ischemic heart disease, and cerebrovascular disease in affected individuals is generally the same as for the general population. Measures taken may include ACE inhibitors and/or ARB drugs for proteinuria or albuminemia (high levels of albumin in the blood); blood pressure control; and cholesterol control. Aspirin and other medications may be recommended for the prevention of stroke. Surveillance may include yearly or more frequent renal function studies, yearly cardiology evaluation, and yearly hearing evaluation.
Fabry disease is caused by the lack of or faulty enzyme needed to metabolize lipids, fat-like substances that include oils, waxes, and fatty acids. The disease is also called alpha-galactosidase-A deficiency. A mutation in the gene that controls this enzyme causes insufficient breakdown of lipids, which build up to harmful levels in the autonomic nervous system (which controls involuntary functions such as breathing and digestion), cardiovascular system, eyes, and kidneys. Symptoms usually begin during childhood or adolescence and include burning sensations in the arms and legs that gets worse with exercise and hot weather and small, non-cancerous, raised reddish-purple blemishes on the skin. Excess material buildup can lead to clouding in the corneas. Lipid storage may lead to impaired blood circulation and increased risk of heart attack or stroke. The heart may also become enlarged and the kidneys may become progressively impaired, leading to renal failure. Other signs include decreased sweating, fever, and gastrointestinal difficulties.Fabry disease is the only X-linked lipid storage disease (where the mother carries the affected gene on the X chromosome that determines the child's gender and passes it to her son). Boys have a 50 percent chance of inheriting the disorder and her daughters have a 50 percent chance of being a carrier. A milder form is common in females, and occasionally some affected females may have severe symptoms similar to males with the disorder.
Enzyme replacement therapy has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of Fabry disease. Enzyme replacement therapy can reduce lipid storage, ease pain, and preserve organ function in some individuals with the disorder. The pain that accompanies the disease may be treated with anticonvulsants. Gastrointestinal hyperactivity may be treated with metoclopramide. Some individuals may require dialysis or kidney transplantation. Restricting one's diet does not prevent lipid buildup in cells and tissues.
Individuals with Fabry disease often die prematurely of complications from strokes, heart disease, or kidney failure.
Fabry disease affects an estimated 1 in 40,000 to 60,000 males. This disorder also occurs in females, although the prevalence is unknown. Milder, late-onset forms of the disorder are probably more common than the classic, severe form.
Fabry disease is caused by mutations in the GLA gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called alpha-galactosidase A. This enzyme is active in lysosomes, which are structures that serve as recycling centers within cells. Alpha-galactosidase A normally breaks down a fatty substance called globotriaosylceramide. Mutations in the GLA gene alter the structure and function of the enzyme, preventing it from breaking down this substance effectively. As a result, globotriaosylceramide builds up in cells throughout the body, particularly cells lining blood vessels in the skin and cells in the kidneys, heart, and nervous system. The progressive accumulation of this substance damages cells, leading to the varied signs and symptoms of Fabry disease.  GLA gene mutations that result in an absence of alpha-galactosidase A activity lead to the classic, severe form of Fabry disease. Mutations that decrease but do not eliminate the enzyme's activity usually cause the milder, late-onset forms of Fabry disease that affect only the heart or kidneys.