In heart failure, the heart cannot pump enough blood to meet the body's needs. In some cases, the heart cannot fill with enough blood. In other cases, the heart can't pump blood to the rest of the body with enough force. Some people have both problems. Heart failure develops over time as the pumping action of the heart gets weaker. It can affect either the right, the left, or both sides of the heart. Heart failure does not mean that the heart has stopped working or is about to stop working. When heart failure affects the left side of the heart, the heart cannot pump enough oxygen-rich blood to the rest of the body. When heart failure affects the right side, the heart cannot pump enough blood to the lungs, where it picks up oxygen. The Heart's Pumping Action In normal hearts, blood vessels called veins bring oxygen-poor blood from the body to the right side of the heart. It is then pumped through the pulmonary artery to the lungs, picking up oxygen. From there, the blood returns to the left side of the heart. Then it is pumped through a large artery called the aorta that distributes blood throughout the body. When the heart is weakened by heart failure, blood and fluid can back up into the lungs, and fluid builds up in the feet, ankles, and legs. People with heart failure often experience tiredness and shortness of breath. Heart Failure is Serious Heart failure is a serious and common condition. Scientists estimate that 5 million people in the U.S. have heart failure and that number is growing. It contributes to 300,000 deaths each year. Heart failure is most common in those age 65 and older and it is the number one reason older people are hospitalized. Other Names for Heart Failure Heart failure can also be called congestive heart failure, systolic heart failure, diastolic heart failure, left-sided heart failure, or right-sided heart failure.
Common Symptoms The most common symptoms of heart failure include shortness of breath or difficulty breathing, feeling tired, and swelling. Swelling usually occurs in the ankles, feet, legs, and sometimes in the abdomen. Swelling is caused by fluid buildup in the body. The fluid buildup can lead to weight gain as well as a cough. The cough can be worse at night and when lying down. When symptoms first begin, you might feel tired or short of breath after routine physical activities, such as climbing stairs. As heart failure progresses, the symptoms get worse. You may feel tired or short of breath after performing simple activities, like getting dressed.
There is no cure for heart failure, but it can be controlled by treating the underlying conditions that cause it. Treatment for heart failure will depend on the type and stage of heart failure (the severity of the condition). The goals for treatment of all stages of heart failure are to reduce symptoms, treat the cause (such as heart disease, high blood pressure, or diabetes), stop the disease from worsening, and prolong life. Treatments for Heart Failure Treatments for heart failure include - lifestyle changes  - medications  - specialized care for those who are in the advanced stages. lifestyle changes medications specialized care for those who are in the advanced stages. Treatment for heart failure will reduce the chances that you will have to go to the hospital and make it easier for you to do the things you like to do. It is very important that you follow your treatment plan by keeping doctor appointments, taking medications, and making lifestyle changes.
Heart failure is caused by other diseases and conditions that damage the heart muscle. It is most commonly caused by coronary artery disease, including heart attack. Diabetes and high blood pressure also contribute to heart failure risk. People who have had a heart attack are at high risk of developing heart failure.
Approximately 5 million people in the United States have heart failure. It contributes to 300,000 deaths each year. It is the number one cause of hospitalizations for people over the age of 65.
Heart failure is more common in - people who are 65 years old or older   - African-Americans  - people who are overweight   - people who have had a heart attack  - men. people who are 65 years old or older African-Americans people who are overweight people who have had a heart attack men. Aging can weaken the heart muscle. Older people also may have had diseases for many years that led to heart failure. African Americans are more likely to have heart failure than people of other races. They're also more likely to have symptoms at a younger age, have more hospital visits due to heart failure, and die from heart failure. Excess weight puts strain on the heart. Being overweight also increases your risk of heart disease and type 2 diabetes. These diseases can lead to heart failure. A history of a heart attack puts people at greater risk for heart failure. Men have a higher rate of heart failure than women.
Ways to prevent heart failure include - keeping your cholesterol and blood pressure levels healthy  - keeping diabetes in check   - maintaining a healthy weight   - quitting smoking   - following a heart healthy diet  - limiting the amount of alcohol you drink   - eating a diet low in salt because salt can cause extra fluid to build up in your body and also contribute to high blood pressure. Older adults should limit their sodium (salt) intake to1500 mg a day (about 2/3 tsp of salt).   - getting regular exercise. Aim for at least 30 minutes a day of exercise. Check with your doctor before starting any exercise program. For information about exercises that older adults can do safely, see Exercises to Try or visit Go4Life, the exercise and physical activity campaign for older adults from the National Institute on Aging.  keeping your cholesterol and blood pressure levels healthy keeping diabetes in check maintaining a healthy weight quitting smoking following a heart healthy diet limiting the amount of alcohol you drink eating a diet low in salt because salt can cause extra fluid to build up in your body and also contribute to high blood pressure. Older adults should limit their sodium (salt) intake to1500 mg a day (about 2/3 tsp of salt). getting regular exercise. Aim for at least 30 minutes a day of exercise. Check with your doctor before starting any exercise program. For information about exercises that older adults can do safely, see Exercises to Try or visit Go4Life, the exercise and physical activity campaign for older adults from the National Institute on Aging.
There is not one specific test to diagnose heart failure. Because the symptoms are common for other conditions, your doctor will determine if you have heart failure by doing a detailed medical history, an examination, and several tests. During a physical exam, a doctor will listen for abnormal heart sounds and lung sounds that indicate fluid buildup, as well as look for signs of swelling. If there are signs of heart failure, the doctor may order several tests, including: - an EKG, or electrocardiogram, to measure the rate and regularity of the heartbeat  - a chest X-ray to evaluate the heart and lungs  - a BNP blood test to measure the level of a hormone called BNP that increases when heart failure is present. an EKG, or electrocardiogram, to measure the rate and regularity of the heartbeat a chest X-ray to evaluate the heart and lungs a BNP blood test to measure the level of a hormone called BNP that increases when heart failure is present.