Respiratory failure happens when not enough oxygen passes from your lungs into your blood. Your body's organs, such as your heart and brain, need oxygen-rich blood to work well. Respiratory failure also can happen if your lungs can't remove carbon dioxide (a waste gas) from your blood. Too much carbon dioxide in your blood can harm your body's organs.    Diseases and conditions that affect your breathing can cause respiratory failure. Examples include       - Lung diseases such as COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), pneumonia, pulmonary embolism, and cystic fibrosis    - Conditions that affect the nerves and muscles that control breathing, such as spinal cord injuries, muscular dystrophy and stroke    - Damage to the tissues and ribs around the lungs. An injury to the chest can cause this damage.    - Drug or alcohol overdose    - Injuries from inhaling smoke or harmful fumes       Treatment for respiratory failure depends on whether the condition is acute (short-term) or chronic (ongoing) and how severe it is. It also depends on the underlying cause. You may receive oxygen therapy and other treatment to help you breathe.    NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
Diseases and conditions that impair breathing can cause respiratory failure. These disorders may affect the muscles, nerves, bones, or tissues that support breathing, or they may affect the lungs directly.
                
When breathing is impaired, your lungs can't easily move oxygen into your blood and remove carbon dioxide from your blood (gas exchange). This can cause a low oxygen level or high carbon dioxide level, or both, in your blood.
                
Respiratory failure can occur as a result of:
                
Conditions that affect the nerves and muscles that control breathing. Examples include muscular dystrophy, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), spinal cord injuries, and stroke.
                
Damage to the tissues and ribs around the lungs. An injury to the chest can cause this damage.
                
Problems with the spine, such as scoliosis (a curve in the spine). This condition can affect the bones and muscles used for breathing.
                
Drug or alcohol overdose. An overdose affects the area of the brain that controls breathing. During an overdose, breathing becomes slow and shallow.
                
Lung diseases and conditions, such as COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), pneumonia, ARDS (acute respiratory distress syndrome), pulmonary embolism, and cystic fibrosis. These diseases and conditions can affect the flow of air and blood into and out of your lungs. ARDS and pneumonia affect gas exchange in the air sacs.
                
Acute lung injuries. For example, inhaling harmful fumes or smoke can injure your lungs.
                
Normal Lungs and Conditions Causing Respiratory Failure
People who have diseases or conditions that affect the muscles, nerves, bones, or tissues that support breathing are at risk for respiratory failure. People who have lung diseases or conditions also are at risk for respiratory failure. For more information, go to "What Causes Respiratory Failure?"
The signs and symptoms of respiratory failure depend on its underlying cause and the levels of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood.
                
A low oxygen level in the blood can cause shortness of breath and air hunger (feeling like you can't breathe in enough air). If the level of oxygen is very low, it also can cause a bluish color on the skin, lips, and fingernails. A high carbon dioxide level can cause rapid breathing and confusion.
                
Some people who have respiratory failure may become very sleepy or lose consciousness. They also may develop arrhythmias (ah-RITH-me-ahs), or irregular heartbeats. These symptoms can occur if the brain and heart are not getting enough oxygen.
Hereditary myopathy with early respiratory failure (HMERF) is an inherited muscle disease that predominantly affects muscles close to the center of the body (proximal muscles) and muscles that are needed for breathing.  The major signs and symptoms of HMERF usually appear in adulthood, on average around age 35. Among the earliest muscles affected in HMERF are the neck flexors, which are muscles at the front of the neck that help hold the head up. Other proximal muscles that become weak in people with HMERF include those of the hips, thighs, and upper arms. Some affected individuals have also reported weakness in muscles of the lower leg and foot called the dorsal foot extensors.  HMERF also causes severe weakness in muscles of the chest that are involved in breathing, particularly the diaphragm. This weakness leads to breathing problems and life-threatening respiratory failure.
HMERF is a rare condition. It has been reported in several families of Swedish and French descent, and in at least one individual from Italy.
HMERF can be caused by a mutation in the TTN gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called titin. Titin plays an important role in muscles the body uses for movement (skeletal muscles) and in heart (cardiac) muscle.  Within muscle cells, titin is an essential component of structures called sarcomeres. Sarcomeres are the basic units of muscle contraction; they are made of proteins that generate the mechanical force needed for muscles to contract. Titin has several functions within sarcomeres. One of its most important jobs is to provide structure, flexibility, and stability to these cell structures. Titin also plays a role in chemical signaling and in assembling new sarcomeres.  The TTN gene mutation responsible for HMERF leads to the production of an altered version of the titin protein. Studies suggest that this change may disrupt titin's interactions with other proteins within sarcomeres and interfere with the protein's role in chemical signaling. Consequently, muscle fibers become damaged and weaken over time. It is unclear why these effects are usually limited to proximal muscles and muscles involved in breathing.  Some people with the characteristic features of HMERF do not have identified mutations in the TTN gene. In these cases, the genetic cause of the condition is unknown.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of HMERF:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Hereditary Myopathy with Early Respiratory Failure (HMERF)  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary myopathy with early respiratory failure  - National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: How Is Respiratory Failure Diagnosed?  - National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: How Is Respiratory Failure Treated?   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care