 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Familial tumoral calcinosis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Bone pain 90% Chondrocalcinosis 90% Hyperphosphatemia 90% Hyperostosis 50% Osteomyelitis 50% Skin rash 50% Abnormality of the palate 7.5% Abnormality of the teeth 7.5% Abnormality of the voice 7.5% Arteriovenous malformation 7.5% Gingivitis 7.5% Hepatomegaly 7.5% Hyperhidrosis 7.5% Hypopigmented skin patches 7.5% Inflammatory abnormality of the eye 7.5% Neoplasm of the skin 7.5% Nephrocalcinosis 7.5% Splenomegaly 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Normophosphatemic familial tumoral calcinosis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the skin - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Calcinosis - Conjunctivitis - Gingivitis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Hyperphosphatemic familial tumoral calcinosis (HFTC) is a condition characterized by an increase in the levels of phosphate in the blood (hyperphosphatemia) and abnormal deposits of phosphate and calcium (calcinosis) in the body's tissues. Calcinosis typically develops in early childhood to early adulthood, although in some people the deposits first appear in infancy or in late adulthood. Calcinosis usually occurs in and just under skin tissue around the joints, most often the hips, shoulders, and elbows. Calcinosis may also develop in the soft tissue of the feet, legs, and hands. Rarely, calcinosis occurs in blood vessels or in the brain and can cause serious health problems. The deposits develop over time and vary in size. Larger deposits form masses that are noticeable under the skin and can interfere with the function of joints and impair movement. These large deposits may appear tumor-like (tumoral), but they are not tumors or cancerous. The number and frequency of deposits varies among affected individuals; some develop few deposits during their lifetime, while others may develop many in a short period of time.  Other features of HFTC include eye abnormalities such as calcium buildup in the clear front covering of the eye (corneal calcification) or angioid streaks that occur when tiny breaks form in the layer of tissue at the back of the eye called Bruch's membrane. Inflammation of the long bones (diaphysis) or excessive bone growth (hyperostosis) may occur. Some affected individuals have dental abnormalities. In males, small crystals of cholesterol can accumulate (microlithiasis) in the testicles, which usually causes no health problems.  A similar condition called hyperphosphatemia-hyperostosis syndrome (HHS) results in increased levels of phosphate in the blood, excessive bone growth, and bone lesions. This condition used to be considered a separate disorder, but it is now thought to be a mild variant of HFTC.
The prevalence of HFTC is unknown, but it is thought to be a rare condition. It occurs most often in Middle Eastern and African populations.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of hyperphosphatemic familial tumoral calcinosis:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Tumoral calcinosis, familial, hyperphosphatemic   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care