Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an inherited condition characterized by episodes of painful inflammation of the abdominal lining (peritonitis),  lining surrounding the lungs (pleurisy), and joints (arthralgia and occasionally arthritis). These episodes are often accompanied by fever and sometimes a characteristic ankle rash. The first episode usually occurs in childhood or the teenage years, but in some cases, the initial attack occurs much later in life. Between attacks, people often do not have any symptoms. Without treatment, FMF can lead to kidney failure due to a buildup of certain protein deposits (amyloidosis). FMF is usually inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion and is caused by mutations in the MEFV gene. Treatment for FMF often involves use of a medication called colchicine.
 FMF is almost always inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that to be affected, a person must have a mutation in both copies of the responsible gene in each cell. The parents of an affected person usually each carry one mutated copy of the gene and are referred to as carriers. Carriers typically do not show signs or symptoms of the condition. When two carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be a carrier like each of the parents, and a 25% chance to not have the condition and not be a carrier. As many as 1 in 5 people of Sephardic (non-Ashkenazi) Jewish, Armenian, Arab and Turkish heritage are carriers for FMF.  In rare cases, this condition appears to be inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that to be affected, a person only needs a change (mutation) in one copy of the responsible gene in each cell. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from an affected parent. Other cases may result from new (de novo) mutations in the gene. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. A person with FMF inherited in an autosomal dominant manner has a 50% chance with each pregnancy of passing along the altered gene to his or her child. In some cases, FMF may appear to be autosomal dominant when it is actually autosomal recessive. This phenomenon is called pseudodominance. This may happen in families if one parent is an unaffected, unknown carrier (with 1 mutation) and the other parent is affected (with 2 mutations). It may appear that an affected child inherited FMF from only the affected parent, when in fact he/she inherited one mutation from each parent.
 In making a diagnosis of FMF, doctors take all of these factors into account: Whether the person has the clinical symptoms common for the disease and whether the symptoms are recurrent. How he or she responds to colchicine treatment. Usually a positive family history in people of Middle Eastern ancestry. The results of genetic testing. Also helpful in establishing a correct diagnosis of FMF is the person's ancestry. Testing for the following can also be helpful: Elevated white blood cell count, which is an indication of an immune response. Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), which is an indication of an inflammatory response. Elevated plasma fibrinogen, which helps stop bleeding. An elevated amount would indicate that something might be wrong with this mechanism. Elevated serum haptoglobin, which would indicate that red blood cells are being destroyed, a common occurrence in rheumatic diseases, such as FMF. Elevated C-reactive protein, which is a special type of protein, produced by the liver, that is only present during episodes of acute inflammation. Elevated albumin in the urine, which is demonstrated by urinalysis. The presence of the protein albumin in the urine can be a symptom of kidney disease, along with microscopic hematuria (very small - microscopic - amounts of blood or blood cells in the urine), during attacks. Is genetic testing for familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) available? Yes. The Genetic Testing Registry (GTR) provides information about the genetic testing for this condition. We strongly recommend that you work with a genetics professional if you wish to pursue genetic testing.
 Currently, there is no known cure for FMF. Physicians can only treat the symptoms of the disease. A common therapy for FMF is daily use of the drug colchicine, a medicine that reduces inflammation. Many people require colchicine for life. This therapy has been successful in preventing attacks of fever in 75 percent of those who take the drug regularly. Over 90 percent of people with FMF demonstrate a marked improvement. Even if colchicine does not prevent the fever attacks, it does prevent the amyloidosis. However, compliance in taking colchicine every day is very important. If a person stops taking the drug, an attack can occur within a few days. Complications of colchicine use can also occur and include muscle weakness (myopathy) and a toxic epidermal necrolysis-like reaction. Since the gene that causes FMF codes for the protein pyrin, researchers hope that by studying how this protein works they will ultimately develop improved treatments for FMF, and possibly for other conditions involving excess inflammation.
Familial Mediterranean fever is an inherited condition characterized by recurrent episodes of painful inflammation in the abdomen, chest, or joints. These episodes are often accompanied by fever and sometimes a rash or headache. Occasionally inflammation may occur in other parts of the body, such as the heart; the membrane surrounding the brain and spinal cord; and in males, the testicles. In about half of affected individuals, attacks are preceded by mild signs and symptoms known as a prodrome. Prodromal symptoms include mildly uncomfortable sensations in the area that will later become inflamed, or more general feelings of discomfort.  The first episode of illness in familial Mediterranean fever usually occurs in childhood or the teenage years, but in some cases, the initial attack occurs much later in life. Typically, episodes last 12 to 72 hours and can vary in severity. The length of time between attacks is also variable and can range from days to years. During these periods, affected individuals usually have no signs or symptoms related to the condition. However, without treatment to help prevent attacks and complications, a buildup of protein deposits (amyloidosis) in the body's organs and tissues may occur, especially in the kidneys, which can lead to kidney failure.
Familial Mediterranean fever primarily affects populations originating in the Mediterranean region, particularly people of Armenian, Arab, Turkish, or Jewish ancestry. The disorder affects 1 in 200 to 1,000 people in these populations. It is less common in other populations.
Mutations in the MEFV gene cause familial Mediterranean fever. The MEFV gene provides instructions for making a protein called pyrin (also known as marenostrin), which is found in white blood cells. This protein is involved in the immune system, helping to regulate the process of inflammation. Inflammation occurs when the immune system sends signaling molecules and white blood cells to a site of injury or disease to fight microbial invaders and facilitate tissue repair. When this process is complete, the body stops the inflammatory response to prevent damage to its own cells and tissues.  Mutations in the MEFV gene reduce the activity of the pyrin protein, which disrupts control of the inflammation process. An inappropriate or prolonged inflammatory response can result, leading to fever and pain in the abdomen, chest, or joints.  Normal variations in the SAA1 gene may modify the course of familial Mediterranean fever. Some evidence suggests that a particular version of the SAA1 gene (called the alpha variant) increases the risk of amyloidosis among people with familial Mediterranean fever.
Familial Mediterranean fever is almost always inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the MEFV gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.  In rare cases, this condition appears to be inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. An autosomal dominant inheritance pattern describes cases in which one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In autosomal dominant inheritance, affected individuals often inherit the mutation from one affected parent.  However, another mechanism is believed to account for some cases of familial Mediterranean fever that were originally thought to be inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. A gene mutation that occurs frequently in a population may result in a disorder with autosomal recessive inheritance appearing in multiple generations in a family, a pattern that mimics autosomal dominant inheritance. If one parent has familial Mediterranean fever (with mutations in both copies of the MEFV gene in each cell) and the other parent is an unaffected carrier (with a mutation in one copy of the MEFV gene in each cell), it may appear as if the affected child inherited the disorder only from the affected parent. This appearance of autosomal dominant inheritance when the pattern is actually autosomal recessive is called pseudodominance.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of familial Mediterranean fever:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Familial Mediterranean Fever  - Genetic Testing Registry: Familial Mediterranean fever   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care