Farber's disease is an inherited condition involving the breakdown and use of fats in the body (lipid metabolism). People with this condition have an abnormal accumulation of lipids (fat) throughout the cells and tissues of the body, particularly around the joints. Farber's disease is characterized by three classic symptoms: a hoarse voice or weak cry, small lumps of fat under the skin and in other tissues (lipogranulomas), and swollen and painful joints. Other symptoms may include difficulty breathing, an enlarged liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly), and developmental delay. Researchers have described seven types of Farber's disease based on their characteristic features. This condition is caused by mutations in the ASAH1 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Farber's disease. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Arthralgia 90% Hepatomegaly 90% Joint swelling 90% Laryngomalacia 90% Limitation of joint mobility 90% Short stature 90% Abnormality of the skin 50% Abnormality of the voice 50% Kyphosis 50% Nystagmus 50% Recurrent respiratory infections 50% Reduced bone mineral density 50% Respiratory insufficiency 50% Skeletal muscle atrophy 50% Abnormality of the macula 7.5% Cognitive impairment 7.5% Opacification of the corneal stroma 7.5% Pulmonary fibrosis 7.5% Splenomegaly 7.5% Arthritis - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cherry red spot of the macula - Failure to thrive - Hoarse cry - Intellectual disability - Irritability - Lipogranulomatosis - Motor delay - Periarticular subcutaneous nodules - Progressive - Variable expressivity - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Farbers disease, also known as Farber's lipogranulomatosis, describes a group of inherited metabolic disorders called lipid storage diseases, in which excess amounts of lipids (oils, fatty acids, and related compounds) build up to harmful levels in the joints, tissues, and central nervous system. The liver, heart, and kidneys may also be affected. Disease onset is typically seen in early infancy but may occur later in life. Symptoms of the classic form may have moderately impaired mental ability and difficulty with swallowing. Other symptoms may include chronic shortening of muscles or tendons around joints. arthritis, swollen lymph nodes and joints, hoarseness, nodules under the skin (and sometimes in the lungs and other parts of the body), and vomiting. Affected persons may require the insertion of a breathing tube. In severe cases, the liver and spleen are enlarged. Farber's disease is caused by a deficiency of the enzyme ceramidase. The disease occurs when both parents carry and pass on the defective gene that regulates the protein sphingomyelin. Children born to these parents have a 25 percent chance of inheriting the disorder and a 50 percent chance of carrying the faulty gene. The disorder affects both males and females.
Currently there is no specific treatment for Farbers disease. Corticosteroids may help relieve pain. Bone marrow transplants may improve granulomas (small masses of inflamed tissue) on individuals with little or no lung or nervous system complications. Older persons may have granulomas surgically reduced or removed.
Most children with the classic form of Farbers disease die by age 2, usually from lung disease. Children born with the most severe form of the disease usually die within 6 months, while individuals having a milder form of the disease may live into their teenage years or young adulthood.
The mission of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) is to seek fundamental knowledge about the brain and nervous system and to use that knowledge to reduce the burden of neurological disease. Research funded by the NINDS focuses on better understanding of how neurological deficits arise in lipid storage diseases and on the development of new treatments targeting disease mechanisms, including gene therapies, cell-based therapies and pharmacological approaches. The NINDS, along with other Institutes and Centers at the National Institutes of Health, supports the Lysosomal Disease network of centers that addresses some of the major challenges in the diagnosis, management, and therapy of rare diseases, including the lipid storage diseases.Research on lipid storage diseases within the Network includes longitudinal studies of the natural history and/or treatment of these disorders. Additional studies will emphasize the quantitative analysis of the central nervous system structure and function, and develop biomarkers (signs that can indicate the diagnosis or progression of a disease) for these disorders.