Eosinophilic fasciitis is a very rare condition in which muscle tissue underneath the skin, called fascia, becomes swollen and thick. Rapid swelling can occur in the hands, arms, legs, and feet. People with this condition have a buildup of eosinophils, a type of white blood cell, in the affected fascia and muscles. The exact cause of this condition is unknown. Corticosteroids and other immune-suppressing medications are used to relieve the symptoms. Eosinophilic fasciitis is similar in appearance to scleroderma but is not related.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Eosinophilic fasciitis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Acrocyanosis 90% Cellulitis 90% Hypermelanotic macule 90% Muscular edema 90% Myalgia 90% Arthralgia 50% Arthritis 50% Myositis 7.5% Paresthesia 7.5% Weight loss 7.5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Eosinophilic fasciitis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 About 10-20% of people with eosinophilic fasciitis recover spontaneously without treatment.  For those who do not, glucocorticoids (0.51 mg/kg/d), such as prednisone, are the mainstay therapy. Even with treatment, improvement in symptoms can take weeks or months. Glucocorticoids are successful in treating eosionophilic fasciitis in over 70% of cases. If glucocorticoids are unsuccessful, methotrexate at low doses (1525 mg once weekly) is probably the most favored second-line treatment, especially in people with reddish to purpleish (morphea-like) skin lesions.  Other treatment options include NSAIDs, D-penicillamine, chloroquine, cimetidine, azathioprine, cyclosporin A, infliximab, UVA-1, and bath PUVA. Physical therapy may help improve joint mobility and decrease contractures. Surgical release has been used in some severe cases to manage significant joint contractures.
Necrotizing fasciitis is a serious infection of the skin, subcutaneous tissue (tissue just beneath the skin) and fascia. The infection can arise suddenly and spread quickly. Necrotizing fasciitis can be caused by several different types of bacteria. Early signs include flu-like symptoms and redness and pain around the infection site. If the infection is not treated promptly, it can lead to multiple organ failure and death. As a result, prompt diagnosis and treatment is essential. Treatment typically includes intravenous antibiotics and surgery to remove infected and dead tissue.
 Symptoms often begin within hours of an injury. Intense pain and tenderness over the affected area are often considered the hallmark symptoms of necrotizing fasciitis (NF). The pain is often described as severe and may raise suspicion of a torn muscle. Some early symptoms may be mistaken for the flu and can include fever, sore throat, stomach ache, nausea, diarrhea, chills, and general body aches. The patient may notice redness around the area which spreads quickly; the affected area can eventually become swollen, shiny, discolored, and hot to the touch. In addition, there may be ulcers or blisters. If the infection continues to spread, the patient may experience the following: dehydration, high fever, fast heart rate, and low blood pressure. Pain may actually improve as tissues and the nerves are destroyed. As the infection spreads, vital organs may be affected and the patient may become confused or delirious. If not successfully treated, NF can lead to shock and eventual death.
 Bacteria that can cause necrotizing fasciitis (NF) include the following: Klebsiella, Clostridium, and Escherichia coli; group A Streptococcus is the most common cause. Anyone can develop NF. Approximately 50% of necrotizing fasciitis cases caused by streptococcal bacteria occur in young and otherwise healthy individuals. Although necrotizing fasciitis most frequently develops after trauma that causes a break in the skin, it can also develop after minor trauma that occurs without a break in the skin. NF can occur as a complication of a surgical procedure; it can also occur at the site of a relatively minor injury such as an insect bite or an injection. In addition, underlying illnesses which weaken the immune system may increase the risk that a person will develop NF. Studies have even suggested a possible relationship between the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs) during varicella infections and the development of necrotizing fasciitis.
 Accurate and prompt diagnosis, treatment with intravenous (IV) antibiotics, and surgery to remove dead tissue are all important for treating necrotizing fasciitis. Since the blood supply to the infected tissue is impaired, antibiotics cannot penetrate into the infected tissue. As a result, surgery to remove the dead, damaged, or infected tissue is the cornerstone of treatment for necrotizing fasciitis. In addition, early surgical treatment may minimize tissue loss, eliminating the need for amputation of the infected extremity. The choice of antibiotics will likely depend on the particular bacteria involved. Supplemental oxygen, fluids, and medicines may be needed to raise the blood pressure. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy and intravenous immunoglobulin may also be considered, but their use in patients with NF is considered controversial by some.