 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for FG syndrome 4. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Neonatal hypotonia 6/8 Sensorineural hearing impairment 4/6 Feeding difficulties in infancy 5/8 Seizures 5/8 Prominent forehead 3/8 Scoliosis 2/8 Hypertelorism - Intellectual disability - Wide nasal bridge - X-linked inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
FG syndrome (FGS) is a genetic condition that affects many parts of the body and occurs almost exclusively in males. "FG" represents the surname initials of the first individuals diagnosed with the disorder. People with FG syndrome frequently have intellectual disability ranging from mild to severe, hypotonia, constipation and/or anal anomalies, a distinctive facial appearance, broad thumbs and great toes, a large head compared to body size (relative macrocephaly), and abnormalities of the corpus callosum. Medical problems including heart defects, seizures, undescended testicle, and an inguinal hernia have also been reported in some affected individuals. Researchers have identified five regions of the X chromosome that are linked to FG syndrome in affected families. Mutations in the MED12 gene appears to be the most common cause of this disorder, leading to FG syndrome 1. Other genes involved with FG syndrome include FLNA (FGS2), CASK (FGS4), UPF3B (FGS6), and  BRWD3 (FGS7). FGS is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. Individualized early intervention and educational services are important so that each child can reach their fullest potential.
 Treatment is aimed at addressing the individual symptoms present in each case. This often involves care by a team of providers which may include pediatricians, neurologists, cardiologists, surgeons, gastroenterologists, and psychologists. Early intervention and special education services should be initiated as soon as possible so that each child can reach his fullest potential. GeneReviews provides a detailed list of management strategies.
The prevalence of FG syndrome is unknown, although several hundred cases have been reported worldwide. Researchers suspect that FG syndrome may be overdiagnosed because many of its signs and symptoms are also seen with other disorders.
Researchers have identified changes in five regions of the X chromosome that are linked to FG syndrome in affected families. Mutations in a gene called MED12, which is located in one of these regions, appear to be the most common cause of the disorder. Researchers are investigating genes in other regions of the X chromosome that may also be associated with FG syndrome.  The MED12 gene provides instructions for making a protein that helps regulate gene activity. Specifically, the MED12 protein forms part of a large complex (a group of proteins that work together) that turns genes on and off. The MED12 protein is thought to play an essential role in development both before and after birth.  At least two mutations in the MED12 gene have been found to cause FG syndrome. Although the mutations alter the structure of the MED12 protein, it is unclear how they lead to intellectual disability, behavioral changes, and the physical features associated with this condition.
FG syndrome is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. The genes likely associated with this disorder, including MED12, are located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation usually must occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of a gene on the X chromosome, males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.