Fine-Lubinsky syndrome (FLS) is a very rare syndrome that affects various parts of the body. Signs and symptoms can vary and may include brachycephaly or plagiocephaly; structural brain abnormalities; abnormal EEG; intellectual disability; deafness; eye conditions (cataracts or glaucoma); distinctive facial features; and body asymmetry. The underlying cause of FLS remains unknown. Almost all cases have been sporadic (occurring in people with no family history of FLS) with the exception of 2 affected siblings, suggesting it was inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
 The cause of Fine-Lubinsky syndrome remains unknown. With the exception of one family report of an affected brother and sister (suggesting an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern), all other cases have been sporadic (occurring in people with no family history of FLS). Additional reports are needed to identify a possible genetic cause of FLS. While karyotypes (pictures of chromosomes) were reportedly normal in affected people, the presence of a very small chromosomal rearrangement (too small to detect with a karyotype) as a possible cause for FLS has not been ruled out.
How  Almost all people reported to have FineLubinsky syndrome (FLS) have been the only affected people in their families (these cases were sporadic). There has been one report of an affected brother and sister with unaffected parents, suggesting autosomal recessive inheritance. Additional reports are needed to identify a possible genetic cause for the condition. Parents of a child with FLS should be aware that if the condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner, each of their children has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to be affected. Although karyotypes (pictures of chromosomes) have been reported as normal in affected people, the presence of a very small chromosomal rearrangement has not been excluded as a possible cause of FLS.
 In 2009, Corona-Rivera et. al reviewed the signs and symptoms reported in people diagnosed with Fine-Lubinsky syndrome (FLS). They identified key signs for diagnosis as: non-synostotic (without synostosis) brachycephaly (short or broad head) or plagiocephaly (flattening of the head); structural brain anomalies; abnormal EEG; intellectual disability; deafness; ocular (eye) abnormalities including cataracts or glaucoma; distinctive facial features involving high/wide forehead, shallow orbits, flat/round face, low-set posteriorly rotated ears, and microstomia (small mouth); and body asymmetry.