Floating-Harbor syndrome is a genetic disorder that was named for the first two identified patients who were seen at Boston Floating Hospital and Harbor General Hospital in California. The main characteristics of this syndrome are short stature, delayed bone growth, delay in expressive language, and distinct facial features. The exact cause of Floating-Harbor syndrome is not known. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive.
 The exact cause of Floating-Harbor syndrome is not known. Autosomal dominant inheritance has been suggested.
 Treatment for Floating-Harbor syndrome is symptomatic and supportive. For example, dental problems and cataracts may be surgically corrected and sign language and/or speech therapy may help with delays in expressive language. Additional management strategies may be obtained from the Floating Harbor Syndrome Support Group at: http://www.floatingharborsyndromesupport.com/ or 336-492-2641.
Floating-Harbor syndrome is a rare disorder; only about 50 cases have been reported in the medical literature.
Floating-Harbor syndrome is caused by mutations in the SRCAP gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called Snf2-related CREBBP activator protein, or SRCAP. SRCAP is one of several proteins that help activate a gene called CREBBP. The protein produced from the CREBBP gene plays a key role in regulating cell growth and division and is important for normal development.  Mutations in the SRCAP gene may result in an altered protein that interferes with normal activation of the CREBBP gene, resulting in problems in development. However, the relationship between SRCAP gene mutations and the specific signs and symptoms of Floating-Harbor syndrome is unknown. Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, a disorder with similar features, is caused by mutations in the CREBBP gene itself.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  Most cases of Floating-Harbor syndrome result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. However, in some cases an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent.