Fragile X syndrome is the most common form of inherited developmental disability. A problem with a specific gene causes the disease. Normally, the gene makes a protein you need for brain development. But the problem causes a person to make little or none of the protein. This causes the symptoms of Fragile X.     People with only a small change in the gene might not show any signs of Fragile X. People with bigger changes can have severe symptoms. These might include       - Intelligence problems, ranging from learning disabilities to severe intellectual disabilities    - Social and emotional problems, such as aggression in boys or shyness in girls    - Speech and language problems, especially in boys       A genetic blood test can diagnose Fragile X. There is no cure. You can treat some symptoms with educational, behavioral, or physical therapy, and with medicines. Getting treatment early can help.    NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
Fragile X syndrome is a genetic condition involving changes in part of the X chromosome. This condition causes a range of developmental problems including learning disabilities and cognitive impairment. It is the most common form of inherited intellectual disability in males and a significant cause of intellectual disability in females. Other signs and symptoms may include symptoms of autism spectrum disorders, seizures, and characteristic physical features. Fragile X syndrome is caused by a change (mutation) in the FMR1 gene and is inherited in an X-linked dominant manner.
 Mutations (changes) in the FMR1 gene cause fragile X syndrome (FXS). This gene carries instructions to make a protein called the fragile X mental retardation 1 protein. The FMR1 gene contains a section of DNA called a CGG triplet repeat, which normally repeats from 5 to around 40 times. In most cases of FXS, this section of DNA is repeated more than 200 times, which "turns off" the FMR1 gene and disrupts the function of the nervous system. In a small portion of cases, other types of changes in the FMR1 gene cause FXS. These changes may involve a deletion of all or part of the gene, or a change in the building blocks (amino acids) used to make the gene's protein. People with 55 to 200 repeats of the CGG segment are said to have an FMR1 premutation. Most people with a premutation are intellectually normal. In some cases, people with a premutation have lower levels of the gene's protein and may have some mild symptoms of FXS. About 20% of women with a premutation have premature ovarian failure, and some people with a premutation have an increased risk of developing fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS).
How  Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is inherited in an X-linked dominant manner. A condition is X-linked if the responsible gene is located on the X chromosome. The inheritance is dominant if having only one changed (mutated) copy of the responsible gene is enough to cause symptoms of the condition. In women who carry an FMR1 gene premutation (approximately 55 to 200 CGG repeats), the repeats can expand to more than 200 repeats in their cells that develop into eggs. This means that women with a premutation (or a full mutation) have an increased risk to have a child with FXS. The size of the risk corresponds to the number of CGG repeats they have. By contrast, men with premutations are not at risk for the repeats expanding to over 200 when passing the gene to offspring. However, men with a premutation will pass the premutation on to all of their daughters and none of their sons. This is because boys receive only a Y chromosome from their fathers.
 Yes, genetic testing is available for fragile X syndrome. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal testing for pregnancies at increased risk are possible if the diagnosis of an FMR1-related disorder (including fragile X syndrome) has been confirmed in a family member. The Genetic Testing Registry (GTR) provides information about the labs that offer genetic testing for fragile X syndrome. The intended audience for the GTR is health care providers and researchers. People with questions about genetic testing should speak with a health care provider or genetics professional.
 There is no specific treatment available for fragile X syndrome.  Management of this condition is generally supportive and may include: recognizing the need for special education and avoiding excessive stimulation, which may help with behavioral problems early educational intervention and special education that is tailored to specific learning difficulties; small class size, individual attention and avoidance of sudden change is often needed medications for behavioral issues that affect social interaction routine medical management of strabismus, ear infections, reflux, seizures, mitral valve prolapse, and/or high blood pressure.
Fragile XE syndrome is a genetic disorder that impairs thinking ability and cognitive functioning. Most affected individuals have mild intellectual disability. In some people with this condition, cognitive function is described as borderline, which means that it is below average but not low enough to be classified as an intellectual disability. Females are rarely diagnosed with fragile XE syndrome, likely because the signs and symptoms are so mild that the individuals function normally.  Learning disabilities are the most common sign of impaired cognitive function in people with fragile XE syndrome. The learning disabilities are likely a result of communication and behavioral problems, including delayed speech, poor writing skills, hyperactivity, and a short attention span. Some affected individuals display autistic behaviors, such as hand flapping, repetitive behaviors, and intense interest in a particular subject. Unlike some other forms of intellectual disability, cognitive functioning remains steady and does not decline with age in fragile XE syndrome.
Fragile XE syndrome is estimated to affect 1 in 25,000 to 100,000 newborn males. Only a small number of affected females have been described in the medical literature. Because mildly affected individuals may never be diagnosed, it is thought that the condition may be more common than reported.
Fragile XE syndrome is caused by mutations in the AFF2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein whose function is not well understood. Some studies show that the AFF2 protein can attach (bind) to DNA and help control the activity of other genes. Other studies suggest that the AFF2 protein is involved in the process by which the blueprint for making proteins is cut and rearranged to produce different versions of the protein (alternative splicing). Researchers are working to determine which genes and proteins are affected by AFF2.  Nearly all cases of fragile XE syndrome occur when a region of the AFF2 gene, known as the CCG trinucleotide repeat, is abnormally expanded. Normally, this segment of three DNA building blocks (nucleotides) is repeated approximately 4 to 40 times. However, in people with fragile XE syndrome, the CCG segment is repeated more than 200 times, which makes this region of the gene unstable. (When expanded, this region is known as the FRAXE fragile site.) As a result, the AFF2 gene is turned off (silenced), and no AFF2 protein is produced. It is unclear how a shortage of this protein leads to intellectual disability in people with fragile XE syndrome.  People with 50 to 200 CCG repeats are said to have an AFF2 gene premutation. Current research suggests that people with a premutation do not have associated cognitive problems.
Fragile XE syndrome is inherited in an X-linked dominant pattern. A condition is considered X-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation in one of the two copies of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In males (who have only one X chromosome), a mutation in the only copy of the gene in each cell causes the disorder. In most cases, males experience more severe symptoms of the disorder than females.  In parents with the AFF2 gene premutation, the number of CCG repeats can expand to more than 200 in cells that develop into eggs or sperm. This means that parents with the premutation have an increased risk of having a child with fragile XE syndrome. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons; sons receive a Y chromosome from their father, which does not include the AFF2 gene.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of fragile XE syndrome:  - Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Developmental Screening Fact Sheet  - Genetic Testing Registry: FRAXE   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Fragile X syndrome is a genetic condition that causes a range of developmental problems including learning disabilities and cognitive impairment. Usually, males are more severely affected by this disorder than females.  Affected individuals usually have delayed development of speech and language by age 2. Most males with fragile X syndrome have mild to moderate intellectual disability, while about one-third of affected females are intellectually disabled. Children with fragile X syndrome may also have anxiety and hyperactive behavior such as fidgeting or impulsive actions. They may have attention deficit disorder (ADD), which includes an impaired ability to maintain attention and difficulty focusing on specific tasks. About one-third of individuals with fragile X syndrome have features of autism spectrum disorders that affect communication and social interaction. Seizures occur in about 15 percent of males and about 5 percent of females with fragile X syndrome.  Most males and about half of females with fragile X syndrome have characteristic physical features that become more apparent with age. These features include a long and narrow face, large ears, a prominent jaw and forehead, unusually flexible fingers, flat feet, and in males, enlarged testicles (macroorchidism) after puberty.
Fragile X syndrome occurs in approximately 1 in 4,000 males and 1 in 8,000 females.
Mutations in the FMR1 gene cause fragile X syndrome. The FMR1 gene provides instructions for making a protein called FMRP. This protein helps regulate the production of other proteins and plays a role in the development of synapses, which are specialized connections between nerve cells. Synapses are critical for relaying nerve impulses.  Nearly all cases of fragile X syndrome are caused by a mutation in which a DNA segment, known as the CGG triplet repeat, is expanded within the FMR1 gene. Normally, this DNA segment is repeated from 5 to about 40 times. In people with fragile X syndrome, however, the CGG segment is repeated more than 200 times. The abnormally expanded CGG segment turns off (silences) the FMR1 gene, which prevents the gene from producing FMRP. Loss or a shortage (deficiency) of this protein disrupts nervous system functions and leads to the signs and symptoms of fragile X syndrome.  Males and females with 55 to 200 repeats of the CGG segment are said to have an FMR1 gene premutation. Most people with a premutation are intellectually normal. In some cases, however, individuals with a premutation have lower than normal amounts of FMRP. As a result, they may have mild versions of the physical features seen in fragile X syndrome (such as prominent ears) and may experience emotional problems such as anxiety or depression. Some children with a premutation may have learning disabilities or autistic-like behavior. The premutation is also associated with an increased risk of disorders called fragile X-associated primary ovarian insufficiency (FXPOI) and fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS).
Fragile X syndrome is inherited in an X-linked dominant pattern. A condition is considered X-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes. (The Y chromosome is the other sex chromosome.) The inheritance is dominant if one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. X-linked dominant means that in females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation in one of the two copies of a gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In males (who have only one X chromosome), a mutation in the only copy of a gene in each cell causes the disorder. In most cases, males experience more severe symptoms of the disorder than females.  In women, the FMR1 gene premutation on the X chromosome can expand to more than 200 CGG repeats in cells that develop into eggs. This means that women with the premutation have an increased risk of having a child with fragile X syndrome. By contrast, the premutation in men does not expand to more than 200 repeats as it is passed to the next generation. Men pass the premutation only to their daughters. Their sons receive a Y chromosome, which does not include the FMR1 gene.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of fragile X syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: FMR1-Related Disorders  - GeneFacts: Fragile X Syndrome: Diagnosis  - GeneFacts: Fragile X Syndrome: Management  - Genetic Testing Registry: Fragile X syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Fragile X syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care