Freeman-Sheldon syndrome is a rare disorder; its exact prevalence is unknown.
Freeman-Sheldon syndrome may be caused by mutations in the MYH3 gene. The MYH3 gene provides instructions for making a protein called embryonic skeletal muscle myosin heavy chain 3. This protein belongs to a group of proteins called myosins, which are involved in cell movement and transport of materials within and between cells. Myosin and another protein called actin are the primary components of muscle fibers and are important for the tensing of muscles (muscle contraction). Embryonic skeletal muscle myosin heavy chain 3 forms part of a myosin protein complex that is active before birth and is important for normal development of the muscles.  MYH3 gene mutations that cause Freeman-Sheldon syndrome likely disrupt the function of the embryonic skeletal muscle myosin heavy chain 3 protein, reducing the ability of fetal muscle cells to contract. This impairment of muscle contraction may interfere with muscle development in the fetus, resulting in the contractures and other muscle and skeletal abnormalities associated with Freeman-Sheldon syndrome. It is unclear how MYH3 gene mutations may cause other features of this disorder.  Some people with Freeman-Sheldon syndrome do not have mutations in the MYH3 gene. In these individuals, the cause of the disorder is unknown.
Freeman-Sheldon syndrome can have different inheritance patterns. In some cases, the condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. The condition can also have an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.  In some cases, the inheritance pattern is unknown.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Freeman-Sheldon syndrome:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Freeman-Sheldon syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care