The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Frontotemporal dementia, ubiquitin-positive. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Agitation - Apathy - Aphasia - Apraxia - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Cerebral cortical atrophy - Dilation of lateral ventricles - Disinhibition - Dysphasia - Frontotemporal dementia - Gliosis - Hallucinations - Hyperorality - Hypersexuality - Memory impairment - Mutism - Neuronal loss in central nervous system - Parkinsonism - Perseveration - Personality changes - Polyphagia - Progressive language deterioration - Repetitive compulsive behavior - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Frontotemporal dementia describes a group of conditions associated with shrinking of the frontal and temporal anterior lobes of the brain. Symptoms include either variable changes in behavior (e.g., impulsive, bored, listless, lack of social contact, lack of empathy, distractibility, blunted emotions, compulsive behavior, decreased energy and motivation) or problems with language (e.g., difficulty making or understanding speech). Spatial skills and memory remain intact. There is a strong genetic component to the disease; it often runs in families. There is no cure for frontotemporal dementia at this time, as a result treatment remains supportive. Although the name and classification of FTD has been a topic of discussion for over a century, the current classification of the syndrome groups together Picks disease, primary progressive aphasia, and semantic dementia as FTD. Some doctors propose adding corticobasal degeneration and progressive supranuclear palsy to FTD and calling the group Pick Complex. You can click on the links to view the GARD pages on these conditions.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Frontotemporal dementia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis - Apathy - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Disinhibition - Frontal lobe dementia - Frontotemporal dementia - Hyperorality - Inappropriate laughter - Inappropriate sexual behavior - Irritability - Language impairment - Neuronal loss in central nervous system - Parkinsonism - Personality changes - Polyphagia - Primitive reflexes (palmomental, snout, glabellar) - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) describes a clinical syndrome associated with shrinking of the frontal and temporal anterior lobes of the brain. Originally known as Picks disease, the name and classification of FTD has been a topic of discussion for over a century. The current designation of the syndrome groups together Picks disease, primary progressive aphasia, and semantic dementia as FTD. Some doctors propose adding corticobasal degeneration and progressive supranuclear palsy to FTD and calling the group Pick Complex. These designations will continue to be debated. As it is defined today, the symptoms of FTD fall into two clinical patterns that involve either (1) changes in behavior, or (2) problems with language. The first type features behavior that can be either impulsive (disinhibited) or bored and listless (apathetic) and includes inappropriate social behavior; lack of social tact; lack of empathy; distractability; loss of insight into the behaviors of oneself and others; an increased interest in sex; changes in food preferences; agitation or, conversely, blunted emotions; neglect of personal hygiene; repetitive or compulsive behavior, and decreased energy and motivation. The second type primarily features symptoms of language disturbance, including difficulty making or understanding speech, often in conjunction with the behavioral types symptoms. Spatial skills and memory remain intact. There is a strong genetic component to the disease; FTD often runs in families.
No treatment has been shown to slow the progression of FTD. Behavior modification may help control unacceptable or dangerous behaviors. Aggressive, agitated, or dangerous behaviors could require medication. Anti-depressants have been shown to improve some symptoms.
The outcome for people with FTD is poor. The disease progresses steadily and often rapidly, ranging from less than 2 years in some individuals to more than 10 years in others. Eventually some individuals with FTD will need 24-hour care and monitoring at home or in an institutionalized care setting.
CHMP2B-related frontotemporal dementia is a progressive brain disorder that affects personality, behavior, and language. The symptoms of this disorder usually become noticeable in a person's fifties or sixties, and affected people survive about 3 to 21 years after the appearance of symptoms.  Changes in personality and behavior are the most common early signs of CHMP2B-related frontotemporal dementia. These changes include inappropriate emotional responses, restlessness, loss of initiative, and neglect of personal hygiene. Affected individuals may overeat sweet foods or place non-food items into their mouths (hyperorality). Additionally, it may become difficult for affected individuals to interact with others in a socially appropriate manner. They increasingly require help with personal care and other activities of daily living.  Many people with CHMP2B-related frontotemporal dementia develop progressive problems with speech and language (aphasia). They may have trouble speaking, although they can often understand others' speech and written text. Affected individuals may also have difficulty using numbers (dyscalculia). In the later stages of the disease, many completely lose the ability to communicate.  Several years after signs and symptoms first appear, some people with CHMP2B-related frontotemporal dementia develop problems with movement. These movement abnormalities include rigidity, tremors, uncontrolled muscle tensing (dystonia), and involuntary muscle spasms (myoclonus). As the disease progresses, most affected individuals become unable to walk.
CHMP2B-related frontotemporal dementia has been reported in one large family in Denmark and a few unrelated individuals from other countries. This disease appears to be a rare form of frontotemporal dementia.
CHMP2B-related frontotemporal dementia results from mutations in the CHMP2B gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called charged multivesicular body protein 2B. This protein is active in the brain, where it plays an essential role in transporting proteins that need to be broken down (degraded).  Mutations in the CHMP2B gene lead to the production of an abnormal version of charged multivesicular body protein 2B. Most of the mutations that cause CHMP2B-related frontotemporal dementia result in the production of an abnormal protein that is missing a critical segment at one end. This segment keeps the protein turned off (inactive) when it is not needed. Without this segment, the protein is constantly turned on (active), which disrupts the transport and degradation of other proteins. These abnormalities ultimately lead to the death of nerve cells (neurons) in the brain.  A gradual loss of neurons throughout the brain is characteristic of CHMP2B-related frontotemporal dementia. Many of the features of this disease result from neuronal death in regions near the front of the brain called the frontal and temporal lobes. The frontal lobes are involved in reasoning, planning, judgment, and problem-solving, while the temporal lobes help process hearing, speech, memory, and emotion. It is unclear why the signs and symptoms of this disease are related primarily to the frontal and temporal lobes.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of CHMP2B-related frontotemporal dementia:  - Family Caregiver Alliance  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Frontotemporal Dementia, Chromosome 3-Linked  - Genetic Testing Registry: Frontotemporal Dementia, Chromosome 3-Linked   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
GRN-related frontotemporal dementia is a progressive brain disorder that can affect behavior, language, and movement. The symptoms of this disorder usually become noticeable in a person's fifties or sixties, and affected people typically survive 6 to 7 years after the appearance of symptoms. However, the features of this condition vary significantly, even among affected members of the same family.  Behavioral changes are the most common early signs of GRN-related frontotemporal dementia. These include marked changes in personality, judgment, and insight. It may become difficult for affected individuals to interact with others in a socially appropriate manner. Affected people may also become easily distracted and unable to complete tasks. They increasingly require help with personal care and other activities of daily living.  Many people with GRN-related frontotemporal dementia develop progressive problems with speech and language (aphasia). Affected individuals may have trouble speaking, remembering words and names (dysnomia), and understanding speech. Over time, they may completely lose the ability to communicate.  Some people with GRN-related frontotemporal dementia also develop movement disorders, such as parkinsonism and corticobasal syndrome. The signs and symptoms of these disorders include tremors, rigidity, unusually slow movement (bradykinesia), involuntary muscle spasms (myoclonus), uncontrolled muscle tensing (dystonia), and an inability to carry out purposeful movements (apraxia).
GRN-related frontotemporal dementia affects an estimated 3 to 15 per 100,000 people aged 45 to 64. This condition accounts for 5 to 10 percent of all cases of frontotemporal dementia.
GRN-related frontotemporal dementia results from mutations in the GRN gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called granulin (also known as progranulin). Granulin is active in many different tissues in the body, where it helps control the growth, division, and survival of cells. Granulin's function in the brain is not well understood, although it appears to play an important role in the survival of nerve cells (neurons).  Most mutations in the GRN gene prevent any granulin from being produced from one copy of the gene in each cell. As a result, cells make only half the usual amount of granulin. It is unclear how a shortage of this protein leads to the features of GRN-related frontotemporal dementia. However, studies have shown that the disorder is characterized by the buildup of a protein called TAR DNA-binding protein (TDP-43) in certain brain cells. The TDP-43 protein forms clumps (aggregates) that may interfere with cell functions and ultimately lead to cell death. Researchers are working to determine how mutations in the GRN gene, and the resulting loss of granulin, are related to a buildup of TDP-43 in the brain.  The features of GRN-related frontotemporal dementia result from the gradual loss of neurons in regions near the front of the brain called the frontal and temporal lobes. The frontal lobes are involved in reasoning, planning, judgment, and problem-solving, while the temporal lobes help process hearing, speech, memory, and emotion. The death of neurons in these areas causes problems with many critical brain functions. However, it is unclear why the loss of neurons occurs in the frontal and temporal lobes more often than other brain regions in people with GRN-related frontotemporal dementia.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person has a parent and other family members with the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of GRN-related frontotemporal dementia:  - Family Caregiver Alliance  - Gene Review: Gene Review: GRN-Related Frontotemporal Dementia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Frontotemporal dementia, ubiquitin-positive   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism-17 (FTDP-17) is a progressive brain disorder that affects behavior, language, and movement. The symptoms of this disorder usually become noticeable in a person's forties or fifties. Most affected people survive 5 to 10 years after the appearance of symptoms, although a few have survived for two decades or more.  Changes in personality and behavior are often early signs of FTDP-17. These changes include a loss of inhibition, inappropriate emotional responses, restlessness, neglect of personal hygiene, and a general loss of interest in activities and events. The disease also leads to deterioration of cognitive functions (dementia), including problems with judgment, planning, and concentration. Some people with FTDP-17 develop psychiatric symptoms, including obsessive-compulsive behaviors, delusions, and hallucinations. It may become difficult for affected individuals to interact with others in a socially appropriate manner. They increasingly require help with personal care and other activities of daily living.  Many people with FTDP-17 develop problems with speech and language. They may have trouble finding words, confuse one word with another (semantic paraphasias), and repeat words spoken by others (echolalia). Difficulties with speech and language worsen over time, and most affected individuals eventually lose the ability to communicate.  FTDP-17 is also characterized by progressive problems with movement. Many affected individuals develop features of parkinsonism, including tremors, rigidity, and unusually slow movement (bradykinesia). As the disease progresses, most affected individuals become unable to walk. Some people with FTDP-17 also have restricted up-and-down eye movement (vertical gaze palsy) and rapid abnormal movements of both eyes (saccades).
The worldwide prevalence of FTDP-17 is unknown. In the Netherlands, where the disease prevalence has been studied, it is estimated to affect 1 in 1 million people. However, the disorder is likely underdiagnosed, so it may actually be more common than this.  FTDP-17 probably accounts for a small percentage of all cases of frontotemporal dementia.
FTDP-17 is caused by mutations in the MAPT gene. This gene is located on chromosome 17, which is how the disease got its name.  The MAPT gene provides instructions for making a protein called tau. This protein is found throughout the nervous system, including in nerve cells (neurons) in the brain. It is involved in assembling and stabilizing microtubules, which are rigid, hollow fibers that make up the cell's structural framework (the cytoskeleton). Microtubules help cells maintain their shape, assist in the process of cell division, and are essential for the transport of materials within cells.  Mutations in the MAPT gene disrupt the normal structure and function of tau. The defective protein assembles into abnormal clumps within neurons and other brain cells. However, it is unclear what effect these clumps have on cell function and survival. FTDP-17 is characterized by the gradual death of cells in areas of the brain called the frontal and temporal lobes. The frontal lobes are involved in reasoning, planning, judgment, and problem-solving, while the temporal lobes help process hearing, speech, memory, and emotion. A loss of cells in these brain regions leads to personality changes, speech difficulties, and the other features of FTDP-17.  FTDP-17 is one of several related diseases known as tauopathies, which are characterized by an abnormal buildup of tau in the brain.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of FTDP-17:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: MAPT-Related Disorders  - Genetic Testing Registry: Frontotemporal dementia   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care