Fryns syndrome is a condition that affects the development of many parts of the body. Signs and symptoms vary widely among affected individuals. Many affected individuals have a defect in the diaphragm muscle such as a congenital diaphragmatic hernia (a hole in the diaphragm present at birth). This may allow the stomach and intestines to move into the chest, which can result in pulmonary hypoplasia (underdevelopment of the lungs). Other signs and symptoms may include abnormalities of the fingers and toes; distinctive facial features; severe developmental delay and intellectual disability; and abnormalities of the brain, cardiovascular system, gastrointestinal system, kidneys, and genitalia. Most affected individuals die before birth or in early infancy. The cause of the condition is not known, but it is thought to be genetic and appears to be inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
How  Although the exact cause of Fryns syndrome is not currently known (and no disease-causing gene has yet been identified), it is thought to be genetic because it tends to "run in families" and has features common to other genetic disorders. It appears to be inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that both copies of the disease-causing gene in each cell of the body (one copy inherited from each parent) have mutations. The parents of an affected individual are referred to as carriers, who typically do not show signs or symptoms of the condition. When two carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be a carrier like each of the parents, and a 25% chance to not have the condition and not be a carrier.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Fryns Hofkens Fabry syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Ulnar deviation of finger 90% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Distal ulnar hypoplasia - Dysplastic radii - Hypoplasia of the radius - Mesomelic arm shortening - Radial bowing - Ulnar deviation of the hand - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The worldwide incidence of Fryns syndrome is unknown. More than 50 affected individuals have been reported in the medical literature. Studies suggest that Fryns syndrome occurs in 1.3 to 10 percent of all cases of congenital diaphragmatic hernia.
The cause of Fryns syndrome is unknown. The disorder is thought to be genetic because it tends to run in families and has features similar to those of other genetic disorders. Duplications and deletions in several chromosome regions have been associated with congenital diaphragmatic hernia and some of the other features of Fryns syndrome. However, no specific genetic change has been found to cause all of the signs and symptoms of this disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Fryns syndrome:  - Children's Hospital of Philadelphia: Treatment of Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Fryns Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Fryns syndrome  - Seattle Children's Hospital: Treatment of Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care