 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Fucosidosis type 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Coarse facial features 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Frontal bossing 90% Hearing impairment 90% Hepatomegaly 90% Hyperhidrosis 90% Hyperkeratosis 90% Hypothyroidism 90% Kyphosis 90% Lipoatrophy 90% Mucopolysacchariduria 90% Skeletal dysplasia 90% Abnormality of the gallbladder 50% Hemiplegia/hemiparesis 50% Hypertonia 50% Muscular hypotonia 50% Opacification of the corneal stroma 50% Recurrent respiratory infections 50% Seizures 50% Skeletal muscle atrophy 50% Splenomegaly 50% Abnormal pyramidal signs 7.5% Abnormality of the nail 7.5% Abnormality of the teeth 7.5% Acrocyanosis 7.5% Cardiomegaly 7.5% Abnormality of the abdominal wall - Absent/hypoplastic coccyx - Absent/hypoplastic paranasal sinuses - Angiokeratoma - Anhidrosis - Anterior beaking of lumbar vertebrae - Anterior beaking of thoracic vertebrae - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Barrel-shaped chest - Cerebral atrophy - Cervical platyspondyly - Coxa valga - Dry skin - Dysostosis multiplex - Elevated sweat chloride - Flexion contracture - Hernia - Hypertelorism - Intellectual disability - Lumbar hyperlordosis - Macroglossia - Oligosacchariduria - Polyneuropathy - Prominent forehead - Scoliosis - Shield chest - Short stature - Spastic tetraplegia - Thick eyebrow - Thick lower lip vermilion - Tortuosity of conjunctival vessels - Vacuolated lymphocytes - Wide nose - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Fucosidosis is a condition that affects many areas of the body, especially the brain. Affected individuals have intellectual disability that worsens with age, and many develop dementia later in life. People with this condition often have delayed development of motor skills such as walking; the skills they do acquire deteriorate over time. Additional signs and symptoms of fucosidosis include impaired growth; abnormal bone development (dysostosis multiplex); seizures; abnormal muscle stiffness (spasticity); clusters of enlarged blood vessels forming small, dark red spots on the skin (angiokeratomas); distinctive facial features that are often described as "coarse"; recurrent respiratory infections; and abnormally large abdominal organs (visceromegaly).  In severe cases, symptoms typically appear in infancy, and affected individuals usually live into late childhood. In milder cases, symptoms begin at age 1 or 2, and affected individuals tend to survive into mid-adulthood.  In the past, researchers described two types of this condition based on symptoms and age of onset, but current opinion is that the two types are actually a single disorder with signs and symptoms that range in severity.
Fucosidosis is a rare condition; approximately 100 cases have been reported worldwide. This condition appears to be most prevalent in Italy, Cuba, and the southwestern United States.
Mutations in the FUCA1 gene cause fucosidosis. The FUCA1 gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called alpha-L-fucosidase. This enzyme plays a role in the breakdown of complexes of sugar molecules (oligosaccharides) attached to certain proteins (glycoproteins) and fats (glycolipids). Alpha-L-fucosidase is responsible for cutting (cleaving) off a sugar molecule called fucose toward the end of the breakdown process.  FUCA1 gene mutations severely reduce or eliminate the activity of the alpha-L-fucosidase enzyme. A lack of enzyme activity results in an incomplete breakdown of glycolipids and glycoproteins. These partially broken down compounds gradually accumulate within various cells and tissues throughout the body and cause cells to malfunction. Brain cells are particularly sensitive to the buildup of glycolipids and glycoproteins, which can result in cell death. Loss of brain cells is thought to cause the neurological symptoms of fucosidosis. Accumulation of glycolipids and glycoproteins also occurs in other organs such as the liver, spleen, skin, heart, pancreas, and kidneys, contributing to the additional symptoms of fucosidosis.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of fucosidosis:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Fucosidosis   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care