Autoimmune atrophic gastritis is an autoimmune disorder in which the immune system mistakenly attacks the healthy cells of the stomach lining. Overtime, this can wear away the stomach's protective barrier and interfere with the absorption of several key vitamins (i.e. vitamin B12, iron, folate). In some cases, autoimmune atrophic gastritis does not cause any obvious signs and symptoms. However, some people may experience nausea, vomiting, a feeling of fullness in the upper abdomen after eating, abdominal pain and/or vitamin deficiencies. The condition is associated with an increased risk of pernicious anemia, gastric polyps and gastric adenocarcinoma. Although the underlying genetic cause has not been identified, studies suggest that the condition may be inherited in an autosomal dominant manner in some families. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person, but may include vitamin B12 injections and endoscopic surveillance.
In some cases, autoimmune atrophic gastritis does not cause any obvious signs and symptoms. However, some people may experience nausea, vomiting, a feeling of fullness in the upper abdomen after eating, or abdominal pain. It is often associated with impaired absorption of vitamin B12 and possibly other vitamin deficiencies (such as folate and iron). People with vitamin B12 deficiency are at risk for pernicious anemia, a condition in which the body does not have enough healthy red blood cells. Autoimmune atrophic gastritis is considered a "precancerous" condition and it may be responsible for the development of gastric adenocarcinoma or carcinoids.
 Autoimmune atrophic gastritis is considered an autoimmune disorder. In people who are affected by this condition, the immune system mistakenly attacks the healthy cells of the stomach lining. Overtime, this can wear away the stomach's protective barrier and interfere with the absorption of several key vitamins (i.e. vitamin B12, iron, folate). This leads to the signs and symptoms of autoimmune atrophic gastritis.
 In some cases, more than one family member can be affected by autoimmune atrophic gastritis. Although the underlying genetic cause has not been identified, studies suggest that the condition may be inherited in an autosomal dominant manner in these families. In autosomal dominant conditions, an affected person only needs a change (mutation) in one copy of the responsible gene in each cell. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from an affected parent. Other cases may result from new (de novo) mutations in the gene. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. A person with the condition has a 50% chance with each pregnancy of passing along the altered gene to his or her child.
 A diagnosis of autoimmune atrophic gastritis is generally not suspected until characteristic signs and symptoms are present. Additional testing can then be ordered to confirm the diagnosis. This generally includes: A biopsy of the affected tissue obtained through endoscopy Blood work that demonstrates autoantibodies against certain cells of the stomach
 The treatment of autoimmune atrophic gastritis is generally focused on preventing and/or alleviating signs and symptoms of the condition. For example, management is focused on preventing vitamin B12, folate and iron deficiencies in the early stages of the condition. With adequate supplementation of these vitamins and minerals, anemia and other health problems may be avoided. If pernicious anemia is already present at the time of diagnosis, replacement of vitamin B12 is generally recommended via injections. In some cases, endoscopic surveillance may also be recommended due to the increased risk of certain types of cancer. While surgery may be appropriate for the treatment of related cancers, we are not aware of surgical management options or recommendations otherwise. Symptoms of gastritis in general may be managed with prescription or over-the-counter medications (besides antibiotics for H. pylori-associated gastritis) that block or reduce acid production and promote healing. Proton pump inhibitors reduce acid by blocking the action of the parts of cells that produce acid. Examples may include omeprazole, lansoprazole, rabeprazole, esomeprazole, dexlansoprazole and pantoprazole. Histamine (H-2) blockers reduce the amount of acid released into the digestive tract, which relieves gastritis pain and promotes healing. Examples include ranitidine, famotidine, cimetidine and nizatidine. Antacids that neutralize stomach acid and provide pain relief may also be used. We are not aware of dietary guidelines or recommendations for autoimmune atrophic gastritis. Much of the literature on dietary management of gastritis is specific to H. Pylori-associated gastritis. However, people with gastritis in general may find some relief by eating smaller, more-frequent meals; avoiding irritating foods; avoiding alcohol; switching pain relievers; and managing stress.
Gastritis is a condition in which the stomachliningknown as the mucosais inflamed, or swollen. The stomach lining contains glands that produce stomach acid and an enzyme called pepsin. The stomach acid breaks down food and pepsin digests protein. A thick layer of mucus coats the stomach lining and helps prevent the acidic digestive juice from dissolving the stomach tissue. When the stomach lining is inflamed, it produces less acid and fewer enzymes. However, the stomach lining also produces less mucus and other substances that normally protect the stomach lining from acidic digestive juice.
                
Gastritis may be acute or chronic:
                
- Acute gastritis starts suddenly and lasts for a short time.  - Chronic gastritis is long lasting. If chronic gastritis is not treated, it may last for years or even a lifetime.
                
Gastritis can be erosive or nonerosive:
                
- Erosive gastritis can cause the stomach lining to wear away, causing erosionsshallow breaks in the stomach liningor ulcersdeep sores in the stomach lining.  - Nonerosive gastritis causes inflammation in the stomach lining; however, erosions or ulcers do not accompany nonerosive gastritis.
                
A health care provider may refer a person with gastritis to a gastroenterologista doctor who specializes in digestive diseases.
Some people who have gastritis have pain or discomfort in the upper part of the abdomenthe area between the chest and hips. However, many people with gastritis do not have any signs and symptoms. The relationship between gastritis and a person's symptoms is not clear. The term gastritis is sometimes mistakenly used to describe any symptoms of pain or discomfort in the upper abdomen.
                
When symptoms are present, they may include
                
- upper abdominal discomfort or pain  - nausea  - vomiting
                

                
Seek Help for Symptoms of Bleeding in the Stomach   Erosive gastritis may cause ulcers or erosions in the stomach lining that can bleed. Signs and symptoms of bleeding in the stomach include   - shortness of breath   - dizziness or feeling faint   - red blood in vomit   - black, tarry stools   - red blood in the stool   - weakness   - paleness    A person with any signs or symptoms of bleeding in the stomach should call or see a health care provider right away.   More information is provided in the NIDDK health topic, Bleeding in the Digestive Tract.
The complications of chronic gastritis may include
                
- peptic ulcers. Peptic ulcers are sores involving the lining of the stomach or duodenum, the first part of the small intestine. NSAID use and H. pylori gastritis increase the chance of developing peptic ulcers.  - atrophic gastritis. Atrophic gastritis happens when chronic inflammation of the stomach lining causes the loss of the stomach lining and glands. Chronic gastritis can progress to atrophic gastritis.  - anemia. Erosive gastritis can cause chronic bleeding in the stomach, and the blood loss can lead to anemia. Anemia is a condition in which red blood cells are fewer or smaller than normal, which prevents the body's cells from getting enough oxygen. Red blood cells contain hemoglobin, an iron-rich protein that gives blood its red color and enables the red blood cells to transport oxygen from the lungs to the tissues of the body. Research suggests that H. pylori gastritis and autoimmune atrophic gastritis can interfere with the body's ability to absorb iron from food, which may also cause anemia. Read more about anemia at www.nhlbi.nih.gov.  - vitamin B12 deficiency and pernicious anemia. People with autoimmune atrophic gastritis do not produce enough intrinsic factor. Intrinsic factor is a protein made in the stomach and helps the intestines absorb vitamin B12. The body needs vitamin B12 to make red blood cells and nerve cells. Poor absorption of vitamin B12 may lead to a type of anemia called pernicious anemia. Read more about pernicious anemia at www.nhlbi.nih.gov.  - growths in the stomach lining. Chronic gastritis increases the chance of developing benign, or noncancerous, and malignant, or cancerous, growths in the stomach lining. Chronic H. pylori gastritis increases the chance of developing a type of cancer called gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma. Read more about MALT lymphoma and gastric cancer at www.cancer.gov.
                
In most cases, acute gastritis does not lead to complications. In rare cases, acute stress gastritis can cause severe bleeding that can be life threatening.
Health care providers treat gastritis with medications to
                
- reduce the amount of acid in the stomach  - treat the underlying cause
                
Reduce the Amount of Acid in the Stomach
                
The stomach lining of a person with gastritis may have less protection from acidic digestive juice. Reducing acid can promote healing of the stomach lining. Medications that reduce acid include
                
- antacids, such as Alka-Seltzer, Maalox, Mylanta, Rolaids, and Riopan. Many brands use different combinations of three basic saltsmagnesium, aluminum, and calciumalong with hydroxide or bicarbonate ions to neutralize stomach acid. Antacids, however, can have side effects. Magnesium salt can lead to diarrhea, and aluminum salt can cause constipation. Magnesium and aluminum salts are often combined in a single product to balance these effects. Calcium carbonate antacids, such as Tums, Titralac, and Alka-2, can cause constipation.  - H2 blockers, such as cimetidine (Tagamet HB), famotidine (Pepcid AC), nizatidine (Axid AR), and ranitidine (Zantac 75). H2 blockers decrease acid production. They are available in both over-the-counter and prescription strengths.  - proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) include omeprazole (Prilosec, Zegerid), lansoprazole (Prevacid), dexlansoprazole (Dexilant), pantoprazole (Protonix), rabeprazole (AcipHex), and esomeprazole (Nexium). PPIs decrease acid production more effectively than H2 blockers. All of these medications are available by prescription. Omeprazole and lansoprazole are also available in over-the-counter strength.
                
Treat the Underlying Cause
                
Depending on the cause of gastritis, a health care provider may recommend additional treatments.
                
- Treating H. pylori infection with antibiotics is important, even if a person does not have symptoms from the infection. Curing the infection often cures the gastritis and decreases the chance of developing complications, such as peptic ulcer disease, MALT lymphoma, and gastric cancer.  - Avoiding the cause of reactive gastritis can provide some people with a cure. For example, if prolonged NSAID use is the cause of the gastritis, a health care provider may advise the patient to stop taking the NSAIDs, reduce the dose, or change pain medications.  - Health care providers may prescribe medications to prevent or treat stress gastritis in a patient who is critically ill or injured. Medications to protect the stomach lining include sucralfate (Carafate), H2 blockers, and PPIs. Treating the underlying illness or injury most often cures stress gastritis.  - Health care providers may treat people with pernicious anemia due to autoimmune atrophic gastritis with vitamin B12 injections.
People may be able to reduce their chances of getting gastritis by preventing H. pylori infection. No one knows for sure how H. pylori infection spreads, so prevention is difficult. To help prevent infection, health care providers advise people to
                
- wash their hands with soap and water after using the bathroom and before eating  - eat food that has been washed well and cooked properly  - drink water from a clean, safe source
Researchers have not found that eating, diet, and nutrition play a major role in causing or preventing gastritis.