Gaucher disease is a rare, inherited disorder in which you do not have enough of an enzyme called glucocerebrosidase. This causes too much of a fatty substance to build up in your spleen, liver, lungs, bones and, sometimes, your brain. This prevents these organs from working properly.    There are three types:       - Type 1, the most common form, causes liver and spleen enlargement, bone pain and broken bones, and, sometimes, lung and kidney problems. It does not affect the brain. It can occur at any age.    - Type 2, which causes severe brain damage, appears in infants. Most children who have it die by age 2.    - In type 3, there may be liver and spleen enlargement. The brain is gradually affected. It usually starts in childhood or adolescence.       Gaucher disease has no cure. Treatment options for types 1 and 3 include medicine and enzyme replacement therapy, which is usually very effective. There is no good treatment for the brain damage of types 2 and 3.    NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
Gaucher disease refers to a group of inherited conditions that affect many organs and tissues in the body. Signs and symptoms vary widely among affected individuals. There are different types of this condition: Gaucher disease perinatal lethal, Gaucher disease type 1, Gaucher disease type 2, and Gaucher disease type 3. Gaucher disease type 1 is the most common form of this condition. Gaucher disease is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion and is caused by mutations in the GBA gene.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Gaucher disease. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Anemia 90% Hepatomegaly 90% Splenomegaly 90% Abdominal pain 50% Abnormality of temperature regulation 50% Abnormality of the genital system 50% Arthralgia 50% Aseptic necrosis 50% Behavioral abnormality 50% Bone pain 50% Delayed skeletal maturation 50% Developmental regression 50% Feeding difficulties in infancy 50% Incoordination 50% Involuntary movements 50% Oculomotor apraxia 50% Recurrent fractures 50% Reduced bone mineral density 50% Seizures 50% Strabismus 50% Thrombocytopenia 50% Abnormality of coagulation 7.5% Abnormality of extrapyramidal motor function 7.5% Abnormality of skin pigmentation 7.5% Abnormality of the aortic valve 7.5% Abnormality of the macula 7.5% Abnormality of the myocardium 7.5% Abnormality of the pericardium 7.5% Bone marrow hypocellularity 7.5% Cirrhosis 7.5% Cranial nerve paralysis 7.5% Gingival bleeding 7.5% Hearing impairment 7.5% Hematuria 7.5% Hemiplegia/hemiparesis 7.5% Hydrocephalus 7.5% Hydrops fetalis 7.5% Ichthyosis 7.5% Increased antibody level in blood 7.5% Increased bone mineral density 7.5% Limitation of joint mobility 7.5% Mitral stenosis 7.5% Muscular hypotonia 7.5% Opacification of the corneal stroma 7.5% Osteoarthritis 7.5% Osteolysis 7.5% Osteomyelitis 7.5% Proteinuria 7.5% Pulmonary fibrosis 7.5% Pulmonary hypertension 7.5% Respiratory insufficiency 7.5% Restrictive lung disease 7.5% Retinopathy 7.5% Short stature 7.5% Tremor 7.5% Ventriculomegaly 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Enzyme replacement therapy is available for most people with types 1 and 3 Gaucher disease. Given intravenously every two weeks, this therapy decreases liver and spleen size, reduces skeletal abnormalities, and reverses other symptoms of the disorder. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has approved eligustat tartrate for Gaucher treatment, which works by administering small molecules that reduce the action of the enzyme that catalyzes glucose to ceramide. Surgery to remove the whole or part of the spleen may be required on rare occasions, and blood transfusions may benefit some anemic individuals. Other individuals may require joint replacement surgery to improve mobility and quality of life. There is no effective treatment for severe brain damage that may occur in persons with types 2 and 3 Gaucher disease.
Enzyme replacement therapy is very beneficial for type 1 and most type 3 individuals with this condition. Successful bone marrow transplantation can reverse the non-neurological effects of the disease, but the procedure carries a high risk and is rarely performed in individuals with Gaucher disease.
The mission of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), a part of the National Institutes of Health), is to seek fundamental knowledge about the brain and nervous system and to use that knowledge to reduce the burden of neurological disease. The NINDS supports research to find ways to treat and prevent lipid storage disorders such as Gaucher disease. For example, researchers hope to identify biomarkers (signs that may indicate risk of a disease and improve diagnosis) for Gaucher disease and other lipid storage diseases; and identify genetic, biochemical, and clinical factors that are associated with disease severity in individuals with Gaucher disease.Additional research is looking at the increased buildup of the protein alpha-synuclein, which is seen in Gaucher disease, Parkinson's disease, and Lewy Body Dementia. Using different models of glucoserebrosidase deficiency, scientists hope to learn how this deficiency impairs the breakdown of lysosomal proteins, including the breakdown of alpha-synuclein.
Gaucher disease occurs in 1 in 50,000 to 100,000 people in the general population. Type 1 is the most common form of the disorder; it occurs more frequently in people of Ashkenazi (eastern and central European) Jewish heritage than in those with other backgrounds. This form of the condition affects 1 in 500 to 1,000 people of Ashkenazi Jewish heritage. The other forms of Gaucher disease are uncommon and do not occur more frequently in people of Ashkenazi Jewish descent.
Mutations in the GBA gene cause Gaucher disease. The GBA gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called beta-glucocerebrosidase. This enzyme breaks down a fatty substance called glucocerebroside into a sugar (glucose) and a simpler fat molecule (ceramide). Mutations in the GBA gene greatly reduce or eliminate the activity of beta-glucocerebrosidase. Without enough of this enzyme, glucocerebroside and related substances can build up to toxic levels within cells. Tissues and organs are damaged by the abnormal accumulation and storage of these substances, causing the characteristic features of Gaucher disease.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Gaucher disease:  - Baby's First Test  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Gaucher Disease  - Genetic Testing Registry: Gaucher disease  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Gaucher Disease   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care