The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Congenital generalized lipodystrophy type 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Acanthosis nigricans - Accelerated skeletal maturation - Acute pancreatitis - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cirrhosis - Clitoromegaly - Congenital onset - Cystic angiomatosis of bone - Decreased fertility - Decreased fertility in females - Decreased serum leptin - Generalized muscular appearance from birth - Hepatic steatosis - Hepatomegaly - Hirsutism - Hyperinsulinemia - Hypertriglyceridemia - Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy - Insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus at puberty - Intellectual disability, mild - Labial hypertrophy - Large hands - Lipodystrophy - Long foot - Mandibular prognathia - Nearly complete absence of metabolically active adipose tissue (subcutaneous, intraabdominal, intrathoracic) - Polycystic ovaries - Polyphagia - Prominent umbilicus - Splenomegaly - Tall stature - Umbilical hernia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Congenital generalized lipodystrophy type 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Acanthosis nigricans - Accelerated skeletal maturation - Acute pancreatitis - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cirrhosis - Clitoromegaly - Cystic angiomatosis of bone - Decreased serum leptin - Generalized muscular appearance from birth - Hepatic steatosis - Hepatomegaly - Hirsutism - Hyperinsulinemia - Hypertriglyceridemia - Insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus at puberty - Labial hypertrophy - Large hands - Lipodystrophy - Long foot - Mandibular prognathia - Nearly complete absence of metabolically active adipose tissue (subcutaneous, intraabdominal, intrathoracic) - Polycystic ovaries - Polyphagia - Prominent umbilicus - Splenomegaly - Tall stature - Umbilical hernia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Congenital generalized lipodystrophy type 4. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Hirsutism 5% Acanthosis nigricans - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Bradycardia - Constipation - Dysphagia - Elevated hepatic transaminases - Elevated serum creatine phosphokinase - Exercise intolerance - Failure to thrive - Feeding difficulties - Flexion contracture - Generalized muscle weakness - Hepatic steatosis - Hepatomegaly - Hyperinsulinemia - Hyperlordosis - Hypertriglyceridemia - IgA deficiency - Ileus - Infantile onset - Insulin resistance - Lipodystrophy - Muscle mounding - Muscle stiffness - Muscular dystrophy - Myalgia - Osteopenia - Osteoporosis - Prolonged QT interval - Prominent umbilicus - Proximal muscle weakness - Pyloric stenosis - Recurrent infections - Scoliosis - Skeletal muscle hypertrophy - Spinal rigidity - Splenomegaly - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Congenital generalized lipodystrophy has an estimated prevalence of 1 in 10 million people worldwide. Between 300 and 500 people with the condition have been described in the medical literature. Although this condition has been reported in populations around the world, it appears to be more common in certain regions of Lebanon and Brazil.
Mutations in the AGPAT2, BSCL2, CAV1, and PTRF genes cause congenital generalized lipodystrophy types 1 through 4, respectively. The proteins produced from these genes play important roles in the development and function of adipocytes, which are the fat-storing cells in adipose tissue. Mutations in any of these genes reduce or eliminate the function of their respective proteins, which impairs the development, structure, or function of adipocytes and makes the body unable to store and use fats properly. These abnormalities of adipose tissue disrupt hormones and affect many of the body's organs, resulting in the varied signs and symptoms of congenital generalized lipodystrophy.  Some of the genes associated with congenital generalized lipodystrophy also play roles in other cells and tissues. For example, the protein produced from the BSCL2 gene is also present in the brain, although its function is unknown. A loss of this protein in the brain may help explain why congenital generalized lipodystrophy type 2 is sometimes associated with intellectual disability.  In some people with congenital generalized lipodystrophy, no mutations have been found in any of the genes listed above. Researchers are looking for additional genetic changes associated with this disorder.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of congenital generalized lipodystrophy:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Berardinelli-Seip Congenital Lipodystrophy  - Genetic Testing Registry: Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hypertrophic Cardiomypathy  - University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center: Lipodystrophy   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care