Glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is a hereditary condition in which red blood cells break down (hemolysis) when the body is exposed to certain foods, drugs, infections or stress. This condition occurs when a person is missing or doesn't have enough glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, an enzyme which helps red blood cells work properly. G6PD deficiency is more likely to occur in males, particularly African Americans, and those from certain parts of Africa, Asia, and the Mediterranean. This condition is inherited in an X-linked recessive manner and is caused by mutations in the G6PD gene. Treatment may involve medicines to treat an infection, stopping drugs that are causing red blood cell destruction, and/or transfusions, in some cases.
 People with G6PD deficiency do not have signs of the disease unless their red blood cells are exposed to certain chemicals in food or medicine, certain bacterial or viral infections, or to stress. Many people with this condition never experience symptoms. The most common medical problem associated with G6PD deficiency is hemolytic anemia, which occurs when red blood cells are destroyed faster than the body can replace them. This type of anemia leads to paleness, yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice), dark urine, fatigue, shortness of breath, enlarged spleen, and a rapid heart rate. Researchers believe that carriers of a mutation in the G6PD gene may be partially protected against malaria, an infectious disease carried by a certain type of mosquito. A reduction in the amount of functional glucose-6-dehydrogenase appears to make it more difficult for this parasite to invade red blood cells. G6PD deficiency occurs more frequently in areas of the world where malaria is common.
  Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is caused by mutations in the G6PD gene. This gene gives the body instructions to make an enzyme called G6PD, which is involved in processing carbohydrates. This enzyme also protects red blood cells from potentially harmful molecules called reactive oxygen species. Chemical reactions involving G6PD produce compounds that prevent reactive oxygen species from building up to toxic levels within red blood cells. Mutations in the G6PD gene lower the amount of G6PD or alter its structure, lessening its ability to play its protective role. As a result, reactive oxygen species can accumulate and damage red blood cells. Factors such as infections, certain drugs, or eating fava beans can increase the levels of reactive oxygen species, causing red blood cells to be destroyed faster than the body can replace them. This reduction of red blood cells causes the signs and symptoms of hemolytic anemia in people with G6PD deficiency.
G6PD deficiency is inherited in an X-linked recessive manner. The gene associated with this condition is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one changed (mutated) copy of the gene in each cell is enough to cause the condition because they don't have another X chromosome with a normal copy of the gene. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females will have two mutated copies of this gene, males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. Fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
 The most important aspect of management for G6PD deficiency is to avoid agents that might trigger an attack. In cases of acute hemolytic anemia, a blood transfusion or even an exchange transfusion may be required. The G6PD Deficiency Association, which is an advocacy group that provides information and supportive resources to individuals and families affected by G6PD deficiency, provides a list of drugs and food ingredients that individuals with this condition should avoid. They also maintain a list of low risk drugs that are generally safe to take in low doses.
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency is a genetic disorder that occurs most often in males. This condition mainly affects red blood cells, which carry oxygen from the lungs to tissues throughout the body. In affected individuals, a defect in an enzyme called glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase causes red blood cells to break down prematurely. This destruction of red blood cells is called hemolysis.  The most common medical problem associated with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency is hemolytic anemia, which occurs when red blood cells are destroyed faster than the body can replace them. This type of anemia leads to paleness, yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice), dark urine, fatigue, shortness of breath, and a rapid heart rate. In people with glucose-6-dehydrogenase deficiency, hemolytic anemia is most often triggered by bacterial or viral infections or by certain drugs (such as some antibiotics and medications used to treat malaria). Hemolytic anemia can also occur after eating fava beans or inhaling pollen from fava plants (a reaction called favism).  Glucose-6-dehydrogenase deficiency is also a significant cause of mild to severe jaundice in newborns. Many people with this disorder, however, never experience any signs or symptoms.
An estimated 400 million people worldwide have glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. This condition occurs most frequently in certain parts of Africa, Asia, and the Mediterranean. It affects about 1 in 10 African American males in the United States.
Mutations in the G6PD gene cause glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency.  The G6PD gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. This enzyme is involved in the normal processing of carbohydrates. It also protects red blood cells from the effects of potentially harmful molecules called reactive oxygen species. Reactive oxygen species are byproducts of normal cellular functions. Chemical reactions involving glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase produce compounds that prevent reactive oxygen species from building up to toxic levels within red blood cells.  If mutations in the G6PD gene reduce the amount of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase or alter its structure, this enzyme can no longer play its protective role. As a result, reactive oxygen species can accumulate and damage red blood cells. Factors such as infections, certain drugs, or ingesting fava beans can increase the levels of reactive oxygen species, causing red blood cells to be destroyed faster than the body can replace them. A reduction in the amount of red blood cells causes the signs and symptoms of hemolytic anemia.  Researchers believe that carriers of a G6PD mutation may be partially protected against malaria, an infectious disease carried by a certain type of mosquito. A reduction in the amount of functional glucose-6-dehydrogenase appears to make it more difficult for this parasite to invade red blood cells. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency occurs most frequently in areas of the world where malaria is common.
This condition is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. The gene associated with this condition is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency:  - Baby's First Test  - Genetic Testing Registry: Glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase test  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hemolytic anemia  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Newborn jaundice   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care