Glutaric acidemia type III is a rare metabolic condition characterized by persistent, isolated accumulation or excretion of glutaric acid. No specific phenotype has been described, as symptoms vary and some individuals remain symptom-free. Unlike other types of glutaric acidemia, this type is caused by a peroxisomal rather than a mitochondrial dysfunction. Mutations in the C7ORF10 gene on chromosome 7p14 have been identified in some people with glutaric acidemia type III and the condition follows an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. Treatment with riboflavin has been helpful in some patients.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Glutaric acidemia type III. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Goiter 5% Hyperthyroidism 5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Diarrhea - Failure to thrive - Glutaric aciduria - Hypertension - Vomiting - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Glutaric acidemia type II (GA2) is a disorder that interferes with the body's ability to break down proteins and fats to produce energy. The severity of GA2 varies widely among affected individuals. Some have a very severe form which appears in the neonatal period and may be fatal; individuals with this form may be born with physical abnormalities including brain malformations, an enlarged liver, kidney malformations, unusual facial features, and genital abnormalities. They may also emit an odor resembling sweaty feet. Others have a less severe form which may appear in infancy, childhood, or even adulthood. Most often, GA2 first appears in infancy or early childhood as a sudden episode of a metabolic crisis that can cause weakness, behavior changes (such as poor feeding and decreased activity) and vomiting. GA2 is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner and is caused by mutations in the ETFA, ETFB, or ETFDH genes. Treatment varies depending on the severity and symptoms but often includes a low fat, low protein, and high carbohydrate diet.
 The goal of treatment is to prevent long-term problems. However, children who have repeated metabolic crises may develop life-long learning problems. Individuals with glutaric acidemia type II should consult with a metabolic doctor and a dietician who can help to develop an appropriate dietary plan. Some treatments may be recommended for some children but not for others. When necessary, treatment should be continued throughout the lifetime. The following treatments are often recommended:     -Avoidance of fasting. Infants and young children with glutaric acidemia type II should eat frequent meals in order to prevent hypoglycemia and metabolic crises.     -A low-fat, low-protein, high-carbohydrate diet may be advised.     -Riboflavin, L-carnitine and glycine supplements may be needed. These supplements help the body create energy.     -Alert the child's doctor if they should become ill, as illness can trigger a metabolic crisis.
Glutaric acidemia type I (GA1) is an inherited disorder in which the body can't process certain proteins properly. People with GA1 have inadequate levels of an enzyme needed to break down certain amino acids. These amino acids and their intermediate breakdown products can accumulate, causing damage to the brain (particularly the basal ganglia, which helps control movement). Specific symptoms and severity vary, but features may include macrocephaly; difficulty moving; having jerking, rigidity, or decreased muscle tone; and/or intellectual disability. GA1 is caused by mutations in the GCDH gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment includes strict dietary control, which may limit progression of symptoms.
How  Glutaric acidemia type I is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that both copies of the responsible gene in each cell must have mutations for a person to be affected. The parents of a person with an autosomal recessive condition typically each carry one mutated copy of the gene and are referred to as carriers. Carriers of an autosomal recessive condition typically are unaffected and have no signs or symptoms. When two carrier parents have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) chance to be affected, a 50% (1 in 2) chance to be an unaffected carrier like each parent, and a 25% chance to be unaffected and not be a carrier.
 Yes. The Genetic Testing Registry (GTR) provides information about the labs that offer genetic testing for this condition. The intended audience for the GTR is health care providers and researchers. Therefore, patients and consumers with specific questions about a genetic test should contact a health care provider or a genetics professional.
Glutaric acidemia type II is an inherited disorder that interferes with the body's ability to break down proteins and fats to produce energy. Incompletely processed proteins and fats can build up in the body and cause the blood and tissues to become too acidic (metabolic acidosis).  Glutaric acidemia type II usually appears in infancy or early childhood as a sudden episode called a metabolic crisis, in which acidosis and low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) cause weakness, behavior changes such as poor feeding and decreased activity, and vomiting. These metabolic crises, which can be life-threatening, may be triggered by common childhood illnesses or other stresses.  In the most severe cases of glutaric acidemia type II, affected individuals may also be born with physical abnormalities. These may include brain malformations, an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly), a weakened and enlarged heart (dilated cardiomyopathy), fluid-filled cysts and other malformations of the kidneys, unusual facial features, and genital abnormalities. Glutaric acidemia type II may also cause a characteristic odor resembling that of sweaty feet.  Some affected individuals have less severe symptoms that begin later in childhood or in adulthood. In the mildest forms of glutaric acidemia type II, muscle weakness developing in adulthood may be the first sign of the disorder.
Glutaric acidemia type II is a very rare disorder; its precise incidence is unknown. It has been reported in several different ethnic groups.
Mutations in any of three genes, ETFA, ETFB, and ETFDH, can result in glutaric acidemia type II. The ETFA and ETFB genes provide instructions for producing two protein segments, or subunits, that come together to make an enzyme called electron transfer flavoprotein. The ETFDH gene provides instructions for making another enzyme called electron transfer flavoprotein dehydrogenase.  Glutaric acidemia type II is caused by a deficiency in either of these two enzymes. Electron transfer flavoprotein and electron transfer flavoprotein dehydrogenase are normally active in the mitochondria, which are the energy-producing centers of cells. These enzymes help break down proteins and fats to provide energy for the body. When one of the enzymes is defective or missing, partially broken down nutrients accumulate in the cells and damage them, causing the signs and symptoms of glutaric acidemia type II.  People with mutations that result in a complete loss of either enzyme produced from the ETFA, ETFB or ETFDH genes are likely to experience the most severe symptoms of glutaric acidemia type II. Mutations that allow the enzyme to retain some activity may result in milder forms of the disorder.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of glutaric acidemia type II:  - Baby's First Test  - Genetic Testing Registry: Glutaric aciduria, type 2   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Glutaric acidemia type I is an inherited disorder in which the body is unable to process certain proteins properly. People with this disorder have inadequate levels of an enzyme that helps break down the amino acids lysine, hydroxylysine, and tryptophan, which are building blocks of protein. Excessive levels of these amino acids and their intermediate breakdown products can accumulate and cause damage to the brain, particularly the basal ganglia, which are regions that help control movement. Intellectual disability may also occur.  The severity of glutaric acidemia type I varies widely; some individuals are only mildly affected, while others have severe problems. In most cases, signs and symptoms first occur in infancy or early childhood, but in a small number of affected individuals, the disorder first becomes apparent in adolescence or adulthood.  Some babies with glutaric acidemia type I are born with unusually large heads (macrocephaly). Affected individuals may have difficulty moving and may experience spasms, jerking, rigidity, or decreased muscle tone. Some individuals with glutaric acidemia have developed bleeding in the brain or eyes that could be mistaken for the effects of child abuse. Strict dietary control may help limit progression of the neurological damage. Stress caused by infection, fever or other demands on the body may lead to worsening of the signs and symptoms, with only partial recovery.
Glutaric acidemia type I occurs in approximately 1 of every 30,000 to 40,000 individuals. It is much more common in the Amish community and in the Ojibwa population of Canada, where up to 1 in 300 newborns may be affected.
Mutations in the GCDH gene cause glutaric acidemia type I.  The GCDH gene provides instructions for making the enzyme glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase. This enzyme is involved in processing the amino acids lysine, hydroxylysine, and tryptophan.  Mutations in the GCDH gene prevent production of the enzyme or result in the production of a defective enzyme that cannot function. This enzyme deficiency allows lysine, hydroxylysine and tryptophan and their intermediate breakdown products to build up to abnormal levels, especially at times when the body is under stress.  The intermediate breakdown products resulting from incomplete processing of lysine, hydroxylysine, and tryptophan can damage the brain, particularly the basal ganglia, causing the signs and symptoms of glutaric acidemia type I.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of glutaric acidemia type I:  - Baby's First Test  - Genetic Testing Registry: Glutaric aciduria, type 1   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care