PMM2-congenital disorder of glycosylation (PMM2-CDG, also known as congenital disorder of glycosylation type Ia) is an inherited condition that affects many parts of the body. The type and severity of problems associated with PMM2-CDG vary widely among affected individuals, sometimes even among members of the same family.  Individuals with PMM2-CDG typically develop signs and symptoms of the condition during infancy. Affected infants may have weak muscle tone (hypotonia), retracted (inverted) nipples, an abnormal distribution of fat, eyes that do not look in the same direction (strabismus), developmental delay, and a failure to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive). Infants with PMM2-CDG also frequently have an underdeveloped cerebellum, which is the part of the brain that coordinates movement. Distinctive facial features are sometimes present in affected individuals, including a high forehead, a triangular face, large ears, and a thin upper lip. Children with PMM2-CDG may also have elevated liver function test results, seizures, fluid around the heart (pericardial effusion), and blood clotting disorders. About 20 percent of affected infants do not survive the first year of life due to multiple organ failure.  The most severe cases of PMM2-CDG are characterized by hydrops fetalis, a condition in which excess fluid builds up in the body before birth. Most babies with hydrops fetalis are stillborn or die soon after birth.  People with PMM2-CDG who survive infancy may have moderate intellectual disability, and some are unable to walk independently. Affected individuals may also experience stroke-like episodes that involve an extreme lack of energy (lethargy) and temporary paralysis. Recovery from these episodes usually occurs over a period of a few weeks to several months.  During adolescence or adulthood, individuals with PMM2-CDG have reduced sensation and weakness in their arms and legs (peripheral neuropathy), an abnormal curvature of the spine (kyphoscoliosis), impaired muscle coordination (ataxia), and joint deformities (contractures). Some affected individuals have an eye disorder called retinitis pigmentosa that causes vision loss. Females with PMM2-CDG have hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, which affects the production of hormones that direct sexual development. As a result, females with PMM2-CDG do not go through puberty. Affected males experience normal puberty but often have small testes.
More than 800 individuals with PMM2-CDG have been identified worldwide.
PMM2-CDG is caused by mutations in the PMM2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called phosphomannomutase 2 (PMM2). The PMM2 enzyme is involved in a process called glycosylation, which attaches groups of sugar molecules (oligosaccharides) to proteins. Glycosylation modifies proteins so they can perform a wider variety of functions. Mutations in the PMM2 gene lead to the production of an abnormal PMM2 enzyme with reduced activity. Without a properly functioning PMM2 enzyme, glycosylation cannot proceed normally. As a result, incorrect oligosaccharides are produced and attached to proteins. The wide variety of signs and symptoms in PMM2-CDG are likely due to the production of abnormally glycosylated proteins in many organs and tissues.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of PMM2-CDG:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia)  - Genetic Testing Registry: Carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome type I   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
ALG12-congenital disorder of glycosylation (ALG12-CDG, also known as congenital disorder of glycosylation type Ig) is an inherited disorder with varying signs and symptoms that can affect several body systems. Individuals with ALG12-CDG typically develop signs and symptoms of the condition during infancy. They may have problems feeding and difficulty growing and gaining weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive). In addition, affected individuals often have intellectual disability, delayed development, and weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and some develop seizures.  Some people with ALG12-CDG have physical abnormalities such as a small head size (microcephaly) and unusual facial features. These features can include folds of skin that cover the inner corners of the eyes (epicanthal folds), a prominent nasal bridge, and abnormally shaped ears. Some males with ALG12-CDG have abnormal genitalia, such as a small penis (micropenis) and undescended testes.  People with ALG12-CDG often produce abnormally low levels of proteins called antibodies (or immunoglobulins), particularly immunoglobulin G (IgG). Antibodies help protect the body against infection by attaching to specific foreign particles and germs, marking them for destruction. A reduction in antibodies can make it difficult for affected individuals to fight infections.  Less common abnormalities seen in people with ALG12-CDG include a weakened heart muscle (cardiomyopathy) and poor bone development, which can lead to skeletal abnormalities.
ALG12-CDG is a rare condition; its prevalence is unknown. Only a handful of affected individuals have been described in the medical literature.
Mutations in the ALG12 gene cause ALG12-CDG. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme that is involved in a process called glycosylation. During this process, complex chains of sugar molecules (oligosaccharides) are added to proteins and fats (lipids). Glycosylation modifies proteins and lipids so they can fully perform their functions. The enzyme produced from the ALG12 gene transfers a simple sugar called mannose to growing oligosaccharides at a particular step in the formation of the sugar chain. Once the correct number of sugar molecules are linked together, the oligosaccharide is attached to a protein or lipid.  ALG12 gene mutations lead to the production of an abnormal enzyme with reduced activity. Without a properly functioning enzyme, mannose cannot be added to the chain efficiently, and the resulting oligosaccharides are often incomplete. Although the short oligosaccharides can be transferred to proteins and fats, the process is not as efficient as with the full-length oligosaccharide. As a result, glycosylation is reduced. The wide variety of signs and symptoms in ALG12-CDG are likely due to impaired glycosylation of proteins and lipids that are needed for normal function of many organs and tissues, including the brain.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of ALG12-CDG:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Congenital Disorders of N-Linked Glycosylation Pathway Overview  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital disorder of glycosylation type 1G   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
ALG6-congenital disorder of glycosylation (ALG6-CDG, also known as congenital disorder of glycosylation type Ic) is an inherited condition that affects many parts of the body. The signs and symptoms of ALG6-CDG vary widely among people with the condition.  Individuals with ALG6-CDG typically develop signs and symptoms of the condition during infancy. They may have difficulty gaining weight and growing at the expected rate (failure to thrive). Affected infants often have weak muscle tone (hypotonia) and developmental delay.  People with ALG6-CDG may have seizures, problems with coordination and balance (ataxia), or stroke-like episodes that involve an extreme lack of energy (lethargy) and temporary paralysis. They may also develop blood clotting disorders. Some individuals with ALG6-CDG have eye abnormalities including eyes that do not look in the same direction (strabismus) and an eye disorder called retinitis pigmentosa, which causes vision loss. Females with ALG6-CDG have hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, which affects the production of hormones that direct sexual development. As a result, most females with ALG6-CDG do not go through puberty.
The prevalence of ALG6-CDG is unknown, but it is thought to be the second most common type of congenital disorder of glycosylation. More than 30 cases of ALG6-CDG have been described in the scientific literature.
ALG6-CDG is caused by mutations in the ALG6 gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme that is involved in a process called glycosylation. Glycosylation is the process by which sugar molecules (monosaccharides) and complex chains of sugar molecules (oligosaccharides) are added to proteins and fats. Glycosylation modifies proteins and fats so they can perform a wider variety of functions. The enzyme produced from the ALG6 gene transfers a simple sugar called glucose to the growing oligosaccharide. Once the correct number of sugar molecules are linked together, the oligosaccharide is attached to a protein or fat.  ALG6 gene mutations lead to the production of an abnormal enzyme with reduced or no activity. Without a properly functioning enzyme, glycosylation cannot proceed normally, and oligosaccharides are incomplete. As a result, glycosylation is reduced or absent. The wide variety of signs and symptoms in ALG6-CDG are likely due to impaired glycosylation of proteins and fats that are needed for normal function in many organs and tissues, including the brain, eyes, liver, and hormone-producing (endocrine) system.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of ALG6-CDG:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Congenital Disorders of N-Linked Glycosylation Pathway Overview   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care