Attacks Usually Start at Night Gout is a form of arthritis that causes sudden onset of intense pain and swelling in the joints, which also may be warm and red. Gout typically attacks one joint at a time, and the attacks usually begin at night. Where Gout Usually Occurs Gout normally attacks joints in the lower part of the body, such as the knee, ankle or big toe. For many people, the joints in the big toe are the first to be attacked. In fact, sometime during the course of the disease, many people will develop gout in the big toe. Other Signs and Symptoms These can include - hyperuricemia -- high levels of uric acid in the body  hyperuricemia -- high levels of uric acid in the body -  the presence of uric acid crystals in joint fluid  the presence of uric acid crystals in joint fluid -  more than one attack of acute arthritis more than one attack of acute arthritis -  arthritis that develops in a day, producing a swollen, red, and warm joint  arthritis that develops in a day, producing a swollen, red, and warm joint -  an attack of arthritis in only one joint, often the toe, ankle, or knee. an attack of arthritis in only one joint, often the toe, ankle, or knee. Diagnosis May Be Difficult Gout may be difficult for doctors to diagnose because the symptoms can be vague, and gout often mimics other conditions. Although most people with gout have hyperuricemia at some time during the course of their disease, it may not be present during an acute attack. In addition, having hyperuricemia alone does not mean that a person will get gout. In fact, most people with hyperuricemia do not develop the disease. Testing for Gout To confirm a diagnosis of gout, the doctor inserts a needle into the inflamed joint and draws a sample of synovial fluid, the substance that lubricates a joint. A laboratory technician places some of the fluid on a slide and looks for monosodium urate crystals under a microscope. If crystals are found in the joint fluid, the person usually has gout.
Symptoms Can Be Controlled With proper treatment, most people with gout are able to control their symptoms and live productive lives. The goals for treatment are to ease the pain that comes from sudden attacks, prevent future attacks, stop uric acid buildup in the tissues and joint space between two bones, and prevent kidney stones from forming. Common Treatments The most common treatments for an attack of gout are high doses of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) which are taken by mouth, or corticosteroids, which are taken by mouth or injected into the affected joint. Patients often begin to improve within a few hours of treatment. The attack usually goes away completely within a week or so. Several NSAIDs are available over the counter. It is important to check with your doctor concerning the safety of using these drugs and to verify the proper dosage. When NSAIDs or corticosteroids fail to control pain and swelling, the doctor may use another drug, colchicine. This drug is most effective when taken within the first 12 hours of an acute attack. For patients who have repeated gout attacks, the doctor may prescribe medicine such as allupurinol, febuxostat, or probenecid to lower uric acid levels. In severe cases of gout that do not respond to other treatments, pegloticase, a medicine administered by intravenous infusion, may be prescribed to reduce levels of uric acid.
Gout is a form of arthritis that causes sudden onset of intense pain and swelling in the joints, which also may be warm and red. Attacks frequently occur at night and can be triggered by stressful events, alcohol or drugs, or the presence of another illness. Sometime during the course of the disease, many people will develop gout in the big toe. Gout frequently affects joints in the lower part of the body such as the knees, ankles, or toes.
Most people with gout have too much uric acid in their blood, a condition called hyperuricemia. Uric acid is a substance that results from the breakdown of purines, which are part of all human tissue and are found in many foods, especially those high in protein. Needle-like crystals of uric acid can build up in the connective tissue, in the joint space between two bones, or both. If too many uric acid crystals form as a result of hyperuricemia, gout can develop.
These risk factors are associated with gout. - Genetics. Many people with gout have a family history of the disease.   -  Gender and age. Gout is more common in men than in women and more common in adults than in children.  -  Weight. Being overweight increases the risk of developing gout because there is more tissue available for turnover or breakdown, which leads to excess uric acid production. (High levels of uric acid in the blood can lead to gout.)  - Alcohol consumption. Drinking too much alcohol can lead to a buildup of uric acid because alcohol interferes with the removal of uric acid from the body.  - Diet. Eating too many foods that are rich in purines such as liver, dried beans and peas, anchovies and gravies, can cause or aggravate gout in some people.   - Lead exposure. In some cases, exposure to lead in the environment can cause gout. Genetics. Many people with gout have a family history of the disease.  Gender and age. Gout is more common in men than in women and more common in adults than in children. Weight. Being overweight increases the risk of developing gout because there is more tissue available for turnover or breakdown, which leads to excess uric acid production. (High levels of uric acid in the blood can lead to gout.) Alcohol consumption. Drinking too much alcohol can lead to a buildup of uric acid because alcohol interferes with the removal of uric acid from the body. Diet. Eating too many foods that are rich in purines such as liver, dried beans and peas, anchovies and gravies, can cause or aggravate gout in some people. Lead exposure. In some cases, exposure to lead in the environment can cause gout.
To confirm a diagnosis of gout, the doctor inserts a needle into the inflamed joint and draws a sample of synovial fluid, the substance that lubricates a joint. A laboratory technician places some of the fluid on a slide and looks for uric acid crystals under a microscope. If uric acid crystals are found in the fluid surrounding the joint, the person usually has gout.