Graves' disease is an autoimmune disorder that leads to overactivity of the thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism). It is caused by an abnormal immune system response that causes the thyroid gland to produce too much thyroid hormones. Graves disease is the most common cause of hyperthyroidism and occurs most often in women over age 20. However, the disorder may occur at any age and may affect males as well. Treatment may include radioiodine therapy, antithyroid drugs, and/or thyroid surgery.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Graves' disease. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of metabolism/homeostasis - Abnormality of the abdomen - Congestive heart failure - Goiter - Graves disease - Hyperactivity - Hyperhidrosis - Hyperreflexia - Irritability - Muscle weakness - Onycholysis - Polyphagia - Pretibial myxedema - Proptosis - Weight loss - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Graves disease is a condition that affects the function of the thyroid, which is a butterfly-shaped gland in the lower neck. The thyroid makes hormones that help regulate a wide variety of critical body functions. For example, thyroid hormones influence growth and development, body temperature, heart rate, menstrual cycles, and weight. In people with Graves disease, the thyroid is overactive and makes more hormones than the body needs. The condition usually appears in mid-adulthood, although it may occur at any age.  Excess thyroid hormones can cause a variety of signs and symptoms. These include nervousness or anxiety, extreme tiredness (fatigue), a rapid and irregular heartbeat, hand tremors, frequent bowel movements or diarrhea, increased sweating and difficulty tolerating hot conditions, trouble sleeping, and weight loss in spite of an increased appetite. Affected women may have menstrual irregularities, such as an unusually light menstrual flow and infrequent periods. Some people with Graves disease develop an enlargement of the thyroid called a goiter. Depending on its size, the enlarged thyroid can cause the neck to look swollen and may interfere with breathing and swallowing.  Between 25 and 50 percent of people with Graves disease have eye abnormalities, which are known as Graves ophthalmopathy. These eye problems can include swelling and inflammation, redness, dryness, puffy eyelids, and a gritty sensation like having sand or dirt in the eyes. Some people develop bulging of the eyes caused by inflammation of tissues behind the eyeball and "pulling back" (retraction) of the eyelids. Rarely, affected individuals have more serious eye problems, such as pain, double vision, and pinching (compression) of the optic nerve connecting the eye and the brain, which can cause vision loss.  A small percentage of people with Graves disease develop a skin abnormality called pretibial myxedema or Graves dermopathy. This abnormality causes the skin on the front of the lower legs and the tops of the feet to become thick, lumpy, and red. It is not usually painful.
Graves disease affects about 1 in 200 people. The disease occurs more often in women than in men, which may be related to hormonal factors. Graves disease is the most common cause of thyroid overactivity (hyperthyroidism) in the United States.
Graves disease is thought to result from a combination of genetic and environmental factors. Some of these factors have been identified, but many remain unknown.  Graves disease is classified as an autoimmune disorder, one of a large group of conditions that occur when the immune system attacks the body's own tissues and organs. In people with Graves disease, the immune system creates a protein (antibody) called thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin (TSI). TSI signals the thyroid to increase its production of hormones abnormally. The resulting overactivity of the thyroid causes many of the signs and symptoms of Graves disease. Studies suggest that immune system abnormalities also underlie Graves ophthalmopathy and pretibial myxedema.  People with Graves disease have an increased risk of developing other autoimmune disorders, including rheumatoid arthritis, pernicious anemia, systemic lupus erythematosus, Addison disease, celiac disease, type 1 diabetes, and vitiligo.  Variations in many genes have been studied as possible risk factors for Graves disease. Some of these genes are part of a family called the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) complex. The HLA complex helps the immune system distinguish the body's own proteins from proteins made by foreign invaders (such as viruses and bacteria). Other genes that have been associated with Graves disease help regulate the immune system or are involved in normal thyroid function. Most of the genetic variations that have been discovered are thought to have a small impact on a person's overall risk of developing this condition.  Other, nongenetic factors are also believed to play a role in Graves disease. These factors may trigger the condition in people who are at risk, although the mechanism is unclear. Potential triggers include changes in sex hormones (particularly in women), viral or bacterial infections, certain medications, and having too much or too little iodine (a substance critical for thyroid hormone production). Smoking increases the risk of eye problems and is associated with more severe eye abnormalities in people with Graves disease.
The inheritance pattern of Graves disease is unclear because many genetic and environmental factors appear to be involved. However, the condition can cluster in families, and having a close relative with Graves disease or another autoimmune disorder likely increases a person's risk of developing the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Graves disease:  - American Thyroid Association: Thyroid Function Tests  - Genetic Testing Registry: Graves disease 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Graves disease 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Graves disease, susceptibility to, X-linked 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Graves' disease  - Graves' Disease & Thyroid Foundation: Treatment Options  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: TSI  - National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: Thyroid Function Tests  - Thyroid Disease Manager: Diagnosis and Treatment of Graves Disease   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Graves disease, also known as toxic diffuse goiter, is the most common cause of hyperthyroidism in the United States. Hyperthyroidism is a disorder that occurs when the thyroid gland makes more thyroid hormone than the body needs.
                
The Thyroid
                
The thyroid is a 2-inch-long, butterfly-shaped gland in the front of the neck below the larynx, or voice box. The thyroid makes two thyroid hormones, triiodothyronine (T3 ) and thyroxine (T4 ). T3 is made from T4 and is the more active hormone, directly affecting the tissues. Thyroid hormones circulate throughout the body in the bloodstream and act on virtually every tissue and cell in the body.
                
Thyroid hormones affect metabolism, brain development, breathing, heart and nervous system functions, body temperature, muscle strength, skin dryness, menstrual cycles, weight, and cholesterol levels. Hyperthyroidism causes many of the bodys functions to speed up.
                
Thyroid hormone production is regulated by another hormone called thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), which is made by the pituitary gland in the brain. When thyroid hormone levels in the blood are low, the pituitary releases more TSH. When thyroid hormone levels are high, the pituitary responds by decreasing TSH production.
                

                
Autoimmune Disorder
                
Graves disease is an autoimmune disorder. Normally, the immune system protects the body from infection by identifying and destroying bacteria, viruses, and other potentially harmful foreign substances. But in autoimmune diseases, the immune system attacks the bodys own cells and organs.
                
With Graves disease, the immune system makes an antibody called thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin (TSI)sometimes called TSH receptor antibodythat attaches to thyroid cells. TSI mimics TSH and stimulates the thyroid to make too much thyroid hormone. Sometimes the TSI antibody instead blocks thyroid hormone production, leading to conflicting symptoms that may make correct diagnosis more difficult.
People with Graves disease may have common symptoms of hyperthyroidism such as
                
- nervousness or irritability  - fatigue or muscle weakness  - heat intolerance  - trouble sleeping  - hand tremors  - rapid and irregular heartbeat  - frequent bowel movements or diarrhea  - weight loss  - goiter, which is an enlarged thyroid that may cause the neck to look swollen and can interfere with normal breathing and swallowing
                
A small number of people with Graves disease also experience thickening and reddening of the skin on their shins. This usually painless problem is called pretibial myxedema or Graves dermopathy.
                
In addition, the eyes of people with Graves disease may appear enlarged because their eyelids are retractedseem pulled back into the eye socketsand their eyes bulge out from the eye sockets. This condition is called Graves ophthalmopathy (GO).
Health care providers can sometimes diagnose Graves disease based only on a physical examination and a medical history. Blood tests and other diagnostic tests, such as the following, then confirm the diagnosis.
                
TSH test. The ultrasensitive TSH test is usually the first test performed. This test detects even tiny amounts of TSH in the blood and is the most accurate measure of thyroid activity available.
                
T3 and T4 test. Another blood test used to diagnose Graves disease measures T3 and T4 levels. In making a diagnosis, health care providers look for below-normal levels of TSH, normal to elevated levels of T4, and elevated levels of T3.
                
Because the combination of low TSH and high T3 and T4 can occur with other thyroid problems, health care providers may order other tests to finalize the diagnosis. The following two tests use small, safe doses of radioactive iodine because the thyroid uses iodine to make thyroid hormone.
                
Radioactive iodine uptake test. This test measures the amount of iodine the thyroid collects from the bloodstream. High levels of iodine uptake can indicate Graves disease.
                
Thyroid scan. This scan shows how and where iodine is distributed in the thyroid. With Graves disease the entire thyroid is involved, so the iodine shows up throughout the gland. Other causes of hyperthyroidism such as nodulessmall lumps in the glandshow a different pattern of iodine distribution.
                
TSI test. Health care providers may also recommend the TSI test, although this test usually isnt necessary to diagnose Graves disease. This test, also called a TSH antibody test, measures the level of TSI in the blood. Most people with Graves disease have this antibody, but people whose hyperthyroidism is caused by other conditions do not.
                
More information about testing for thyroid problems is provided in the NIDDK health topic, Thyroid Tests.
Treatment for Graves disease can sometimes affect pregnancy. After treatment with surgery or radioactive iodine, TSI antibodies can still be present in the blood, even when thyroid levels are normal. If a pregnant woman has received either of these treatments prior to becoming pregnant, the antibodies she produces may travel across the placenta to the babys bloodstream and stimulate the fetal thyroid.
                
A pregnant woman who has been treated with surgery or radioactive iodine should inform her health care provider so her baby can be monitored for thyroid-related problems later in the pregnancy. Pregnant women may safely be treated with anti-thyroid medications.
                
For more information about pregnancy and anti-thyroid medications, see Medications under the section titled How is Graves disease treated?More information about pregnancy and thyroid disease is provided in the NIDDK health topic, Pregnancy and Thyroid Disease.
Experts recommend that people eat a balanced diet to obtain most nutrients. More information about diet and nutrition is provided by the National Agricultural Library available at www.nutrition.gov.
                
Dietary Supplements
                
Iodine is an essential mineral for the thyroid. However, people with autoimmune thyroid disease may be sensitive to harmful side effects from iodine. Taking iodine drops or eating foods containing large amounts of iodinesuch as seaweed, dulse, or kelpmay cause or worsen hyperthyroidism. More information about iodine is provided by the National Library of Medicine in the fact sheet, Iodine in diet, available at www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus.
                
Women need more iodine when they are pregnantabout 250 micrograms a daybecause the baby gets iodine from the mothers diet. In the United States, about 7 percent of pregnant women may not get enough iodine in their diet or through prenatal vitamins.3 Choosing iodized saltsalt supplemented with iodineover plain salt and prenatal vitamins containing iodine will ensure this need is met.
                
To help ensure coordinated and safe care, people should discuss their use of dietary supplements, such as iodine, with their health care provider. Tips for talking with health care providers are available through the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health.
                
3 Zimmerman MB. Iodine deficiency in pregnancy and the effects of maternal iodine supplementation on the offspring: a review. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2009;89(2):668S672S.