Gray platelet syndrome (GPS) is a rare inherited bleeding disorder characterized by platelets that have a gray appearance, severe thrombocytopenia, myelofibrosis, and splenomegaly. About 60 cases from various populations around the world have been described in the literature to date. GPS results from the absence or reduction of alpha-granules in platelets, which store proteins that promote platelet adhesiveness and wound healing when secreted during an injury. GPS is caused by mutations in the NBEAL2 gene and inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
 Signs and symptoms usually appear at birth or in early childhood and include low platelet counts, easy bruising, prolonged bleeding, and nose bleeds. Affected individuals often have myelofibrosis and splenomegaly. Bleeding tendency is usually mild to moderate in those with mild thrombocytopenia. However, the thrombocytopenia and myelofibrosis are usually progressive in nature. GPS may result in fatal hemorrhage (bleeding), especially in adulthood when platelet counts are further decreased. Female patients may develop heavy menstrual bleeding. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Gray platelet syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of coagulation 90% Bruising susceptibility 90% Thrombocytopenia 90% Abnormality of the menstrual cycle 50% Epistaxis 50% Myelodysplasia 50% Splenomegaly 50% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Impaired collagen-induced platelet aggregation - Impaired thrombin-induced platelet aggregation - Menorrhagia - Myelofibrosis - Progressive - Prolonged bleeding time - Reduced quantity of Von Willebrand factor - Reduced von Willebrand factor activity - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 There is no specific treatment for GPS, but management involves anticipating and preventing risks of bleeding (e.g. possible platelet transfusions before surgery). Treatment may also include administration of desmopressin. Splenectomy should be considered to increase the platelet counts in those whose platelet counts decrease to approximately 30,000/microliter. Prognosis is generally good early in life when thrombocytopenia is mild. Those with platelets counts less than 30,000/microliter are at risk for life-threatening bleeding.
Gray platelet syndrome is a bleeding disorder associated with abnormal platelets, which are blood cell fragments involved in blood clotting. People with this condition tend to bruise easily and have an increased risk of nosebleeds (epistaxis). They may also experience abnormally heavy or extended bleeding following surgery, dental work, or minor trauma. Women with gray platelet syndrome often have irregular, heavy periods (menometrorrhagia). These bleeding problems are usually mild to moderate, but they have been life-threatening in a few affected individuals.  A condition called myelofibrosis, which is a buildup of scar tissue (fibrosis) in the bone marrow, is another common feature of gray platelet syndrome. Bone marrow is the spongy tissue in the center of long bones that produces most of the blood cells the body needs, including platelets. The scarring associated with myelofibrosis damages bone marrow, preventing it from making enough blood cells. Other organs, particularly the spleen, start producing more blood cells to compensate; this process often leads to an enlarged spleen (splenomegaly).
Gray platelet syndrome appears to be a rare disorder. About 60 cases have been reported worldwide.
Gray platelet syndrome can be caused by mutations in the NBEAL2 gene. Little is known about the protein produced from this gene. It appears to play a role in the formation of alpha-granules, which are sacs inside platelets that contain growth factors and other proteins that are important for blood clotting and wound healing. In response to an injury that causes bleeding, the proteins stored in alpha-granules help platelets stick to one another to form a plug that seals off damaged blood vessels and prevents further blood loss.  Mutations in the NBEAL2 gene disrupt the normal production of alpha-granules. Without alpha-granules, platelets are unusually large and fewer in number than usual (macrothrombocytopenia). The abnormal platelets also appear gray when viewed under a microscope, which gives this condition its name. A lack of alpha-granules impairs the normal activity of platelets during blood clotting, increasing the risk of abnormal bleeding. Myelofibrosis is thought to occur because the growth factors and other proteins that are normally packaged into alpha-granules leak out into the bone marrow. The proteins lead to fibrosis that affects the bone marrow's ability to make new blood cells.  Some people with gray platelet syndrome do not have an identified mutation in the NBEAL2 gene. In these individuals, the cause of the condition is unknown.
When gray platelet syndrome is caused by NBEAL2 gene mutations, it has an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene in each cell.  Gray platelet syndrome can also be inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of an altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. An affected person often inherits the condition from one affected parent. Researchers are working to determine which gene or genes are associated with the autosomal dominant form of gray platelet syndrome.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of gray platelet syndrome:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Gray platelet syndrome  - National Heart Lung and Blood Institute: How is Thrombocytopenia Treated?   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care