Diabetes causes blood glucose levels to be above normal. People with diabetes have problems converting food to energy. After food is eaten, it is broken down into a sugar called glucose. Glucose is then carried by the blood to cells throughout the body. The hormone insulin, made in the pancreas, helps the body change blood glucose into energy. People with diabetes, however, either no longer make enough insulin, or their insulin doesn't work properly, or both.
                
Type 2 diabetes
                
Type 2 diabetes is the most common type in American Indians. This type of diabetes can occur at any age, even during childhood. People develop type 2 diabetes because the cells in the muscles, liver, and fat do not use insulin properly. Eventually, the body cannot make enough insulin. As a result, the amount of glucose in the blood increases while the cells are starved of energy. Over time, high blood glucose damages nerves and blood vessels, leading to problems such as heart disease, stroke, blindness, kidney failure, and amputation.
                
Other kinds of diabetes
                
Type 1 diabetes
                
Type 1 diabetes is rare in American Indians. People develop type 1 diabetes when their bodies no longer make any insulin. Type 1 is usually first diagnosed in children or young adults but can develop at any age.
                
Gestational diabetes
                
Gestational diabetes is first diagnosed during pregnancy. It occurs when the body doesn't use insulin properly. Having an American Indian family background raises the risk of developing gestational diabetes. Although this form of diabetes usually goes away after the baby is born, a woman who has had it is more likely to develop type 2 diabetes later in life.
Many people have no visible signs or symptoms of diabetes. Symptoms can also be so mild that you might not notice them. More than 5 million people in the United States have type 2 diabetes and do not know it.
                
- increased thirst  - increased hunger   - fatigue   - increased urination, especially at night   - unexplained weight loss   - blurred vision   - sores that do not heal
- My mother had diabetes when I was born.   - I am overweight.  - I have a parent, brother, or sister with diabetes.  - My family background is American Indian.  - I have had gestational diabetes, or I gave birth to at least one baby weighing more than 9 pounds.  - My blood pressure is 140/90 mmHg or higher, or I have been told that I have high blood pressure.  - My cholesterol levels are higher than normal. My HDL cholesterol"good" cholesterolis below 35 mg/dL, or my triglyceride level is above 250 mg/dL.  - I am fairly inactive. I exercise fewer than three times a week.
Diabetes is when your blood glucose, also called blood sugar, is too high. Blood glucose is the main type of sugar found in your blood and your main source of energy. Glucose comes from the food you eat and is also made in your liver and muscles. Your blood carries glucose to all of your bodys cells to use for energy.
                
Your pancreasan organ, located between your stomach and spine, that helps with digestionreleases a hormone it makes, called insulin, into your blood. Insulin helps your blood carry glucose to all your bodys cells. Sometimes your body doesnt make enough insulin or the insulin doesnt work the way it should. Glucose then stays in your blood and doesnt reach your cells. Your blood glucose levels get too high and can cause diabetes or prediabetes.
                
Over time, having too much glucose in your blood can cause health problems.
                
*See the Pronunciation Guide for tips on how to say the the words in bold type.
The signs and symptoms of diabetes are
                
- being very thirsty  - urinating often  - feeling very hungry  - feeling very tired  - losing weight without trying  - sores that heal slowly  - dry, itchy skin  - feelings of pins and needles in your feet  - losing feeling in your feet  - blurry eyesight
                
Some people with diabetes dont have any of these signs or symptoms. The only way to know if you have diabetes is to have your doctor do a blood test.