Guillain-Barr syndrome is a disorder in which the body's immune system attacks part of the peripheral nervous system. The first symptoms of this disorder include varying degrees of weakness or tingling sensations in the legs. In many instances, the weakness and abnormal sensations spread to the arms and upper body. These symptoms can increase in intensity until the muscles cannot be used at all and the person is almost totally paralyzed. In these cases, the disorder is life-threatening and is considered a medical emergency. The individual is often put on a ventilator to assist with breathing. Most individuals, however, have good recovery from even the most severe cases of Guillain-Barr syndrome (GBS), although some continue to have some degree of weakness. Guillain-Barr syndrome is rare. Usually Guillain-Barr occurs a few days or weeks after the person has had symptoms of a respiratory or gastrointestinal viral infection. Occasionally, surgery will trigger the syndrome. In rare instances, vaccinations may increase the risk of GBS. The disorder can develop over the course of hours or days, or it may take up to 3 to 4 weeks. No one yet knows why Guillain-Barr strikes some people and not others or what sets the disease in motion. What scientists do know is that the body's immune system begins to attack the body itself, causing what is known as an autoimmune disease. Guillain-Barr is called a syndrome rather than a disease because it is not clear that a specific disease-causing agent is involved. Reflexes such as knee jerks are usually lost. Because the signals traveling along the nerve are slower, a nerve conduction velocity (NCV) test can give a doctor clues to aid the diagnosis. The cerebrospinal fluid that bathes the spinal cord and brain contains more protein than usual, so a physician may decide to perform a spinal tap.
There is no known cure for Guillain-Barr syndrome, but therapies can lessen the severity of the illness and accelerate the recovery in most patients. There are also a number of ways to treat the complications of the disease. Currently, plasmapheresis (also known as plasma exchange) and high-dose immunoglobulin therapy are used. Plasmapheresis seems to reduce the severity and duration of the Guillain-Barr episode. In high-dose immunoglobulin therapy, doctors give intravenous injections of the proteins that in small quantities, the immune system uses naturally to attack invading organism. Investigators have found that giving high doses of these immunoglobulins, derived from a pool of thousands of normal donors, to Guillain-Barr patients can lessen the immune attack on the nervous system. The most critical part of the treatment for this syndrome consists of keeping the patient's body functioning during recovery of the nervous system. This can sometimes require placing the patient on a ventilator, a heart monitor, or other machines that assist body function.
Guillain-Barr syndrome can be a devastating disorder because of its sudden and unexpected onset. Most people reach the stage of greatest weakness within the first 2 weeks after symptoms appear, and by the third week of the illness 90 percent of all patients are at their weakest. The recovery period may be as little as a few weeks or as long as a few years. About 30 percent of those with Guillain-Barr still have a residual weakness after 3 years. About 3 percent may suffer a relapse of muscle weakness and tingling sensations many years after the initial attack.
Scientists are concentrating on finding new treatments and refining existing ones. Scientists are also looking at the workings of the immune system to find which cells are responsible for beginning and carrying out the attack on the nervous system. The fact that so many cases of Guillain-Barr begin after a viral or bacterial infection suggests that certain characteristics of some viruses and bacteria may activate the immune system inappropriately. Investigators are searching for those characteristics. Neurological scientists, immunologists, virologists, and pharmacologists are all working collaboratively to learn how to prevent this disorder and to make better therapies available when it strikes.
The prevalence of Guillain-Barr syndrome is estimated to be 6 to 40 cases per 1 million people. The occurrence of the different types of Guillain-Barr syndrome varies across regions. AIDP is the most common type in North America and Europe, accounting for approximately 90 percent of cases of Guillain-Barr syndrome in those regions. AMAN and AMSAN together account for 30 to 50 percent of cases in Asian countries and Latin America but only 3 to 5 percent of cases in North America and Europe. Miller Fisher syndrome is also more common in Asian countries, accounting for approximately 20 percent of cases in these countries but less than 5 percent in North America and Europe.
Some studies show that normal variations in certain genes may be associated with an increased risk of developing Guillain-Barr syndrome; however, more research is necessary to identify and confirm associated genes. Many of the genes that may increase the risk of Guillain-Barr syndrome are involved in the immune system, and their roles in fighting infection may contribute to the development of the condition.  Most people who develop Guillain-Barr syndrome have a bacterial or viral infection prior to developing the signs and symptoms of the condition. However, only a very small percentage of people who have an infection develop Guillain-Barr syndrome. In order to fight the infection, specialized immune cells produce proteins called antibodies that recognize specific proteins or molecules on the bacteria or virus (pathogen). Some research shows that antibodies that recognize molecules on some pathogens may also recognize proteins on the body's own nerves. As a result, the immune system attacks the nerves, causing inflammation and damaging the axons and myelin, which can lead to the signs and symptoms of Guillain-Barr syndrome.
Almost all cases of Guillain-Barr syndrome are sporadic, which means they occur in people with no history of the condition in their family. A few families with more than one affected family member have been described; however, the condition does not have a clear pattern of inheritance. Multiple genetic and environmental factors likely play a part in determining the risk of developing this condition. As a result, inheriting a genetic variation linked with Guillain-Barr syndrome does not mean that a person will develop the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Guillain-Barr syndrome:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Guillain-Barre syndrome, familial  - National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: Guillain-Barr Syndrome Fact Sheet   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care