Guillain-Barre syndrome is a rare disorder that causes your immune system to attack your peripheral nervous system (PNS). The PNS nerves connect your brain and spinal cord with the rest of your body. Damage to these nerves makes it hard for them to transmit signals. As a result, your muscles have trouble responding to your brain. No one knows what causes the syndrome. Sometimes it is triggered by an infection, surgery, or a vaccination.     The first symptom is usually weakness or a tingling feeling in your legs. The feeling can spread to your upper body. In severe cases, you become almost paralyzed. This is life-threatening. You might need a respirator to breathe. Symptoms usually worsen over a period of weeks and then stabilize.     Guillain-Barre can be hard to diagnose. Possible tests include nerve tests and a spinal tap. Most people recover. Recovery can take a few weeks to a few years. Treatment can help symptoms, and may include medicines or a procedure called plasma exchange.    NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
Guillain-Barr syndrome is a rare disorder in which the body's immune system attacks part of the peripheral nervous system. Symptoms include muscle weakness, numbness, and tingling sensations, which can increase in intensity until the muscles cannot be used at all. Usually Guillain-Barr syndrome occurs a few days or weeks after symptoms of a viral infection. Occasionally, surgery or vaccinations will trigger the syndrome. It remains unclear why only some people develop Guillain-Barr syndrome but there may be a genetic predisposition in some cases. Diagnosed patients should be admitted to a hospital for early treatment. There is no cure for Guillain-Barr syndrome, but treatments such as plasma exchange (plasmapheresis) and high dose immunoglobulins may reduce the severity and duration of symptoms. Recovery can take as little as a few days to as long as a few years. About 30% of those with Guillain-Barr syndrome have residual weakness. A small number may suffer a relapse many years after the initial attack.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Guillain-Barre syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Acute demyelinating polyneuropathy - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.