Symptoms Symptoms of gum disease may include: - bad breath that won't go away   - red or swollen gums   - tender or bleeding gums  - painful chewing   - loose teeth   - sensitive teeth  - receding gums or longer appearing teeth  bad breath that won't go away red or swollen gums tender or bleeding gums painful chewing loose teeth sensitive teeth receding gums or longer appearing teeth If You Have Symptoms Any of these symptoms may be a sign of a serious problem that should be checked by a dentist. Sometimes gum disease has no clear symptoms. At your dental visit, the dentist or hygienist should - ask about your medical history to identify any conditions or risk factors (such as smoking) that may contribute to gum disease.   - examine your gums and note any signs of inflammation.   - use a tiny ruler called a 'probe' to check for and measure any pockets. In a healthy mouth, the depth of these pockets is usually between 1 and 3 millimeters. This test for pocket depth is usually painless.  ask about your medical history to identify any conditions or risk factors (such as smoking) that may contribute to gum disease. examine your gums and note any signs of inflammation. use a tiny ruler called a 'probe' to check for and measure any pockets. In a healthy mouth, the depth of these pockets is usually between 1 and 3 millimeters. This test for pocket depth is usually painless. The dentist or hygienist may also - take an x-ray to see whether there is any bone loss and to examine the condition of the teeth and supporting tissues.   - refer you to a periodontist. Periodontists are experts in the diagnosis and treatment of gum disease and may provide you with treatment options that are not offered by your dentist.  take an x-ray to see whether there is any bone loss and to examine the condition of the teeth and supporting tissues. refer you to a periodontist. Periodontists are experts in the diagnosis and treatment of gum disease and may provide you with treatment options that are not offered by your dentist.
Gum disease is an infection of the tissues that hold your teeth in place. In its early stages, it is usually painless, and many people are not aware that they have it. But in more advanced stages, gum disease can lead to sore or bleeding gums, painful chewing problems, and even tooth loss.
Gum disease is caused by dental plaque -- a sticky film of bacteria that builds up on teeth. Regular brushing and flossing help get rid of plaque. But plaque that is not removed can harden and form tartar that brushing doesn't clean. Only a professional cleaning by a dentist or dental hygienist can remove tartar.
If left untreated, gum disease can lead to tooth loss. Gum disease is the leading cause of tooth loss in older adults.
There are a number of risk factors that can increase your chances of developing periodontal disease. - Smoking is one of the most significant risk factors associated with the development of gum disease and can even lower the chances for successful treatment.  - Hormonal changes in women can make gums more sensitive and make it easier for gingivitis to develop.   - Diabetes puts people at higher risk for developing infections, including gum disease.   - Diseases like cancer or AIDS and their treatments can also affect the health of gums.   - There are hundreds of prescription and over-the-counter medications that can reduce the flow of saliva, which has a protective effect on the mouth. Without enough saliva, the mouth is vulnerable to infections such as gum disease. And some medicines can cause abnormal overgrowth of the gum tissue; this can make it difficult to keep teeth and gums clean.   - Some people are more prone to severe gum disease because of their genetic makeup.  Smoking is one of the most significant risk factors associated with the development of gum disease and can even lower the chances for successful treatment. Hormonal changes in women can make gums more sensitive and make it easier for gingivitis to develop. Diabetes puts people at higher risk for developing infections, including gum disease. Diseases like cancer or AIDS and their treatments can also affect the health of gums. There are hundreds of prescription and over-the-counter medications that can reduce the flow of saliva, which has a protective effect on the mouth. Without enough saliva, the mouth is vulnerable to infections such as gum disease. And some medicines can cause abnormal overgrowth of the gum tissue; this can make it difficult to keep teeth and gums clean. Some people are more prone to severe gum disease because of their genetic makeup.
Yes, you can prevent gum disease with proper dental hygiene and regular cleanings by your dentist or dental hygienist. Specifically, you should - brush your teeth twice a day (with a fluoride toothpaste).   - floss regularly to remove plaque from between teeth. Or use a device such as a special pick recommended by a dental professional.   - visit the dentist routinely for a check-up and professional cleaning.  - not smoke.  - eat a well-balanced diet. (For more information, see "Eating Well As You Get Older" at  http://nihseniorhealth.gov/eatingwellasyougetolder/toc.html) brush your teeth twice a day (with a fluoride toothpaste). floss regularly to remove plaque from between teeth. Or use a device such as a special pick recommended by a dental professional. visit the dentist routinely for a check-up and professional cleaning. not smoke. eat a well-balanced diet. (For more information, see "Eating Well As You Get Older" at  http://nihseniorhealth.gov/eatingwellasyougetolder/toc.html)
The dentist will ask about your medical history to identify any conditions or risk factors such as smoking that may contribute to gum disease. The dentist or hygienist will also - examine your gums and note any signs of inflammation.   - use a tiny ruler called a 'probe' to check for and measure any periodontal pockets. In a healthy mouth, the depth of these pockets is usually between 1 and 3 millimeters.   - take an x-ray to see whether there is any bone loss. examine your gums and note any signs of inflammation. use a tiny ruler called a 'probe' to check for and measure any periodontal pockets. In a healthy mouth, the depth of these pockets is usually between 1 and 3 millimeters. take an x-ray to see whether there is any bone loss. The dentist or hygienist may also - take an x-ray to see whether there is any bone loss and to examine the condition of the teeth and supporting tissues.   - refer you to a periodontist. Periodontists are experts in the diagnosis and treatment of gum disease and may provide you with treatment options that are not offered by your dentist. take an x-ray to see whether there is any bone loss and to examine the condition of the teeth and supporting tissues. refer you to a periodontist. Periodontists are experts in the diagnosis and treatment of gum disease and may provide you with treatment options that are not offered by your dentist.
If you have gum disease, you're not alone. Many U.S. adults currently have some form of the disease. It ranges from simple gum inflammation, called gingivitis, to serious damage to the tissue and bone supporting the teeth. In the worst cases, you can lose teeth.    In gingivitis, the gums become red and swollen. They can bleed easily. Gingivitis is a mild form of gum disease. You can usually reverse it with daily brushing and flossing and regular cleanings by a dentist or dental hygienist. Untreated gingivitis can lead to periodontitis. If you have periodontitis, the gums pull away from the teeth and form pockets that become infected. If not treated, the bones, gums and connective tissue that support the teeth are destroyed.    NIH: National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research