Hajdu-Cheney syndrome is a rare disease; its prevalence is unknown. Fewer than 100 affected individuals have been described in the medical literature.
Hajdu-Cheney syndrome is associated with mutations in the NOTCH2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a receptor called Notch2. Receptor proteins have specific sites into which certain other proteins, called ligands, fit like keys into locks. When a ligand binds to the Notch2 receptor, it triggers signals that are important for the normal development and function of many different types of cells. Studies suggest that signaling through the Notch2 receptor is important for the early development of bones and later for bone remodeling, a normal process in which old bone is removed and new bone is created to replace it. Notch2 signaling also appears to be involved in the development of the heart, kidneys, teeth, and other parts of the body.  Mutations in a specific area near the end of the NOTCH2 gene are associated with Hajdu-Cheney syndrome. These mutations lead to a version of the Notch2 receptor that cannot be broken down normally. As a result, the receptor continues to be active even after signaling should stop. Researchers are unsure how excessive Notch2 signaling is related to the varied features of Hajdu-Cheney syndrome. They suspect that the skeletal features of the disorder, including acro-osteolysis, osteoporosis, and distinctive facial features, likely result from abnormal bone development and remodeling. Excess signaling through the overactive Notch2 receptor may increase the removal of old bone, reduce the formation of new bone, or both. It is less clear how the overactive receptor contributes to the other signs and symptoms of this condition.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered NOTCH2 gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Most cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Less commonly, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Hajdu-Cheney syndrome:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hajdu-Cheney syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care