Split hand split foot nystagmus is a rare congenital syndrome characterized by split hand and split foot deformity and eye abnormalities, especially nystagmus. It is thought to have an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. Currently, the underlying genetic defect has not been identified. The outlook for children with this condition is good.
 People with this condition are born with split hands and feet. Split hands and split foot refers to a developmental malformation consisting of missing digits (fingers and/or toes), a deep median cleft (cleft down the center of the hand or foot), and fusion of remaining digits. People with this syndrome also have rapid involuntary movements of the eyes, called nystagmus. Abnormalities of the teeth can occur rarely. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Split hand split foot nystagmus. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Nystagmus 90% Split foot 90% Split hand 90% Abnormality of the metacarpal bones 50% Strabismus 50% Visual impairment 50% Abnormality of retinal pigmentation 7.5% Cataract 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Congenital nystagmus - Monodactyly (hands) - Retinopathy - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
How  Split hand split foot nystagmus is thought to be inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. A person with an autosomal dominant condition has a 50% chance of passing the condition on to their children. Click here to learn more about autosomal dominant inheritance. Sometimes a person is the only one in their family with the autosomal dominant disorder. One explanation for this is that the person has a de novo or new mutation. De novo mutations refer to a change in a gene that is present for the first time in one family member as a result of a mutation in the mothers egg or fathers sperm, or in the fertilized egg itself. In addition, there have been a couple of case reports where unaffected parents had more than one child with split hand split foot nystagmus. It is thought that this may have been due to germline mosaicism. In germline mosaicism, one of the unaffected parents has the disease-causing genetic mutation in some of his/her eggs or sperm only. Click here to learn more about mosaicism.
Split hand foot malformation (SHFM) is a type of birth defect that consists of missing digits (fingers and/or toes), a deep cleft down the center of the hand or foot, and fusion of remaining digits. The severity of this condition varies widely among affected individuals. SHFM is sometimes called ectrodactyly; however, this is a nonspecific term used to describe missing digits. SHFM may occur by itself (isolated) or it may be part of a syndrome with abnormalities in other parts of the body. At least six different forms of isolated SHFM have been described. Each type is associated with a different underlying genetic cause. SHFM1 has been linked to chromosome 7, and SHFM2 is linked to the X chromosome. SHFM3 is caused by a duplication of chromosome 10 at position 10q24. Changes (mutations) in the TP63 gene cause SHFM4. SHFM5 is linked to chromosome 2, and SHFM6 is caused by mutations in the WNT10B gene. SHFM may be inherited in an autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-linked manner.
 Split hand foot malformation may occur as an isolated feature or it may be associated with a genetic syndrome. Researchers believe that a large number of mutations can cause split hand foot malformation. A few of which have been identified: FBXW4 and TP63. Most commonly the conditions are passed through families in an autosomal dominant fashion with reduced penetrance. In autosomal dominant inheritance an affected parent would have a 1 in 2 or 50% chance with each pregnancy of passing the genetic defect to his/her offspring. In conditions with reduced penetrance a person who inherits the underlying genetic defect, may never develop the condition. More rarely other forms of inheritance have been reported (e.g., autosomal-recessive, X-linked, chromosome deletions, chromosome duplications).
Split hand foot malformation (SHFM) is a type of birth defect that consists of missing digits (fingers and/or toes), a deep cleft down the center of the hand or foot, and fusion of remaining digits. The severity of this condition varies widely among affected individuals. SHFM is sometimes called ectrodactyly; however, this is a nonspecific term used to describe missing digits. SHFM may occur by itself (isolated) or it may be part of a syndrome with abnormalities in other parts of the body. At least six different forms of isolated SHFM have been described. Each type is associated with a different underlying genetic cause. SHFM1 has been linked to chromosome 7, and SHFM2 is linked to the X chromosome. SHFM3 is caused by a duplication of chromosome 10 at position 10q24. Changes (mutations) in the TP63 gene cause SHFM4. SHFM5 is linked to chromosome 2, and SHFM6 is caused by mutations in the WNT10B gene. SHFM may be inherited in an autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-linked manner.