Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) is a rare but deadly viral infection. It is spread by mice and rats. They shed the virus in their urine, droppings, and saliva. Tiny droplets with the virus can enter the air. People can get the disease if they breathe infected air or come into contact with rodents or their urine or droppings. You cannot catch it from people.    Early symptoms of HPS include       -  Fatigue    -  Fever     -  Muscle aches, especially in the thighs, hips and back    -  Headaches    -  Chills    -  Dizziness    -  Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea or abdominal pain       Later symptoms include coughing and shortness of breath.     Controlling rodents in and around your house is the best way to prevent infection. If you have been around rodents and have symptoms of fever, deep muscle aches, and severe shortness of breath, see your doctor immediately.    There is no specific treatment, cure, or vaccine for HPS. Patients may do better if it is recognized early and they get medical care in an intensive care unit. They often need to use a breathing machine and have oxygen therapy.    Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) is a severe, respiratory disease caused by infection with a hantavirus. People can become infected with a hantavirus through contact with hantavirus-infected rodents or their saliva, urine and/or droppings. Early symptoms universally include fatigue, fever and muscle aches (especially in the thighs, hips, and/or back), and sometimes include headaches, dizziness, chills, and abdominal problems such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and pain. Later symptoms of the syndrome occur 4 to 10 days after initial onset and include coughing and shortness of breath. HPS can be fatal; approximately 38% of individuals with HPS do not survive. There is no cure or specific treatment for HPS, but early diagnosis and treatment in intensive care may increase the chance of recovery.
Due to the small number of HPS cases, the "incubation time" is not positively known. However, on the basis of limited information, it appears that symptoms may develop between 1 and 5 weeks after exposure to fresh urine, droppings, or saliva of infected rodents.
  Early Symptoms
  
    
   
Early symptoms include fatigue, fever and muscle aches, especially in the large muscle groups—thighs, hips, back, and sometimes shoulders. These symptoms are universal.
   
There may also be headaches, dizziness, chills, and abdominal problems, such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. About half of all HPS patients experience these symptoms.
  
  Late Symptoms
  
    
   
Four to 10 days after the initial phase of illness, the late symptoms of HPS appear. These include coughing and shortness of breath, with the sensation of, as one survivor put it, a "...tight band around my chest and a pillow over my face" as the lungs fill with fluid.
  
  Is the Disease Fatal?
  
Yes. HPS can be fatal. It has a mortality rate of 38%.