Hashimoto's encephalitis (HE) is a condition characterized by onset of confusion with altered level of consciousness; seizures; and jerking of muscles (myoclonus). Psychosis, including visual hallucinations and paranoid delusions, has also been reported. The exact cause of HE is not known, but may involve an autoimmune or inflammatory abnormality. It is associated with Hashimoto's thyroiditis, but the nature of the relationship between the two conditions is unclear. Most people with HE respond well to corticosteroid therapy or other immunosuppressive therapies, and symptoms typically improve or resolve over a few months.
 The symptoms of Hashimoto's encephalitis can vary among affected people. They most often include sudden or subacute onset of confusion with alteration of consciousness. Some affected people have multiple, recurrent episodes of neurological deficits with cognitive dysfunction. Others experience a more progressive course characterized by slowly progressive cognitive impairment with dementia, confusion, hallucinations, or sleepiness. In some cases, rapid deterioration to coma can occur. In addition to confusion and mental status changes, symptoms may include seizures and myoclonus (muscle jerking) or tremor. Psychosis, including visual hallucinations and paranoid delusions, has also been reported.
 The exact cause of Hashimoto's encephalitis (HE) is unknown, but is thought to relate to autoimmune or other autoinflammatory processes. While it is associated with Hashimoto's thyroiditis, the exact nature of the relationship between the two conditions is unclear. It does not appear to be directly related to hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism.
 We are aware of only one instance when more than one person in the same family had Hashimoto's encephalitis (HE). To our knowledge, no other cases of familial HE have been reported; HE typically occurs in people with no family history of the condition (sporadically). HE can occur in association with other autoimmune disorders, so HE may develop due to an interaction between genes that predispose a person (susceptibility genes) and environmental triggers.
 Medical management of Hashimoto's encephalitis (HE) usually involves corticosteroids and treatment of thyroid abnormalities (if present). The optimal dose of oral steroids is not known. Most patients with HE respond to steroid therapy. Symptoms typically improve or resolve over a few months. Decisions regarding the length of steroid treatment and the rate of tapering off steroids are based on the individual's response to treatment. Treatment may last as long as two years in some patients. People with HE who experience repeated HE relapses, do not respond to steroids, and/or cannot tolerate steroid treatment have been treated with other immunosuppressive medications such as azathioprine and cyclophosphamide. Intravenous immunoglobulin, and plasmapheresis have also been used.
Hashimotos syndrome is a form of chronic inflammation that can damage the thyroid, reducing its ability to produce hormones (hypothyroidism). An early sign of the condition may be enlargement of the thyroid (called a goiter), which can potentially interfere with breathing or swallowing. Other signs and symptoms may include tiredness, weight gain, thin and dry hair, joint or muscle pain, constipation, cold intolerance, and/or a slowed heart rate. Affected women may have irregular menstrual periods or difficulty becoming pregnant. Hashimotos syndrome is the most common cause of hypothyroidism in the United States. It is more common in women than in men, and it usually appears in mid-adulthood. The exact cause is unknown but it is thought to result from a combination of genetic and environmental factors. Treatment is not always needed, but may include taking synthetic thyroid hormone.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hashimoto's syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autoimmune antibody positivity - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Hashimoto thyroiditis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Hashimoto's syndrome is an autoimmune disorder thought to result from a combination of genetic and environmental factors. Some of these factors have been identified, but many remain unknown. People with Hashimotos syndrome have antibodies to various thyroid antigens. The antibodies "attack" the thyroid, resulting in damage to the gland. Most of the genes associated with Hashimotos syndrome are part of a gene family called the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) complex, which helps the immune system distinguish the body's own proteins from proteins made by viruses and bacteria or other agents. However, the genetic factors have only a small effect on a person's overall risk of developing this condition. Non-genetic factors that may trigger the condition in people at risk may include changes in sex hormones (particularly in women), viral infections, certain medications, exposure to ionizing radiation, and excess consumption of iodine (a substance involved in thyroid hormone production).
 The inheritance pattern of Hashimoto's syndrome is unclear because many genetic and environmental factors appear to be involved. However, the condition can cluster in families, and having a close relative with Hashimoto's syndrome or another autoimmune disorder likely increases a person's risk of developing the condition.
Hashimotos disease, also called chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis or autoimmune thyroiditis, is an autoimmune disease. An autoimmune disease is a disorder in which the bodys immune system attacks the bodys own cells and organs. Normally, the immune system protects the body from infection by identifying and destroying bacteria, viruses, and other potentially harmful foreign substances.
                
In Hashimotos disease, the immune system attacks the thyroid gland, causing inflammation and interfering with its ability to produce thyroid hormones. Large numbers of white blood cells called lymphocytes accumulate in the thyroid. Lymphocytes make the antibodies that start the autoimmune process.
                
Hashimotos disease often leads to reduced thyroid function, or hypothyroidism. Hypothyroidism is a disorder that occurs when the thyroid doesnt make enough thyroid hormone for the bodys needs. Thyroid hormones regulate metabolismthe way the body uses energyand affect nearly every organ in the body. Without enough thyroid hormone, many of the bodys functions slow down. Hashimotos disease is the most common cause of hypothyroidism in the United States.1
                
More information is provided in the NIDDK health topic, Hypothyroidism.
Many people with Hashimotos disease have no symptoms at first. As the disease slowly progresses, the thyroid usually enlarges and may cause the front of the neck to look swollen. The enlarged thyroid, called a goiter, may create a feeling of fullness in the throat, though it is usually not painful. After many years, or even decades, damage to the thyroid causes it to shrink and the goiter to disappear.
                
Not everyone with Hashimotos disease develops hypothyroidism. For those who do, the hypothyroidism may be subclinicalmild and without symptoms, especially early in its course. With progression to hypothyroidism, people may have one or more of the following symptoms:
                
- fatigue  - weight gain  - cold intolerance  - joint and muscle pain  - constipation, or fewer than three bowel movements a week  - dry, thinning hair  - heavy or irregular menstrual periods and problems becoming pregnant  - depression  - memory problems  - a slowed heart rate
Treatment generally depends on whether the thyroid is damaged enough to cause hypothyroidism. In the absence of hypothyroidism, some health care providers treat Hashimotos disease to reduce the size of the goiter. Others choose not to treat the disease and simply monitor their patients for disease progression.
                
Hashimotos disease, with or without hypothyroidism, is treated with synthetic thyroxine, which is man-made T4. Health care providers prefer to use synthetic T4, such as Synthroid, rather than synthetic T3, because T4 stays in the body longer, ensuring a steady supply of thyroid hormone throughout the day. The thyroid preparations made with animal thyroid are not considered as consistent as synthetic thyroid (Levothyroxine) and rarely prescribed today.
                
Health care providers routinely test the blood of patients taking synthetic thyroid hormone and adjust the dose as necessary, typically based on the result of the TSH test. Hypothyroidism can almost always be completely controlled with synthetic thyroxine, as long as the recommended dose is taken every day as instructed.
Iodine is an essential mineral for the thyroid. However, people with Hashimotos disease may be sensitive to harmful side effects from iodine. Taking iodine drops or eating foods containing large amounts of iodinesuch as seaweed, dulse, or kelpmay cause or worsen hypothyroidism. Read more in Iodine in diet at www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/002421.htm.
                
Women need more iodine when they are pregnantabout 220 micrograms a daybecause the baby gets iodine from the mothers diet. Women who are breastfeeding need about 290 micrograms a day. In the United States, about 7 percent of pregnant women may not get enough iodine in their diet or through prenatal vitamins.3 Pregnant women should choose iodized saltsalt supplemented with iodineover plain salt and take prenatal vitamins containing iodine to ensure this need is met.
                
To help ensure coordinated and safe care, people should discuss their use of complementary and alternative medical practices, including their use of dietary supplements such as iodine, with their health care provider. Tips for talking with health care providers are available through the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health.