The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal cortical bone morphology 90% Abnormal form of the vertebral bodies 90% Abnormality of immune system physiology 90% Abnormality of pelvic girdle bone morphology 90% Abnormality of the femur 90% Abnormality of the metaphyses 90% Abnormality of the tibia 90% Bowing of the long bones 90% Craniofacial hyperostosis 90% Neurological speech impairment 7.5% Splenomegaly 7.5% Hyperostosis cranialis interna 5% Leukopenia 5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Bone marrow hypocellularity - Diaphyseal dysplasia - Increased bone mineral density - Myelofibrosis - Phenotypic variability - Refractory anemia - Thrombocytopenia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia is a rare inherited condition characterized by abnormally thick bones and a shortage of red blood cells (anemia). Signs and symptoms of the condition become apparent in early childhood.  In affected individuals, the long bones in the arms and legs are unusually dense and wide. The bone changes specifically affect the shafts of the long bones, called diaphyses, and areas near the ends of the bones called metaphyses. The bone abnormalities can lead to bowing of the legs and difficulty walking.  Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia also causes scarring (fibrosis) of the bone marrow, which is the spongy tissue inside long bones where blood cells are formed. The abnormal bone marrow cannot produce enough red blood cells, which leads to anemia.Signs and symptoms of anemia that have been reported in people with Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia include extremely pale skin (pallor) and excessive tiredness (fatigue).
Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia is a rare disorder; only a few cases have been reported in the medical literature. Most affected individuals have been from the Middle East and India.
Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia results from mutations in the TBXAS1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called thromboxane A synthase 1, which acts as part of a chemical signaling pathway involved in normal blood clotting (hemostasis). Based on its role in Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia, researchers suspect that thromboxane A synthase 1 may also be important for bone remodeling, which is a normal process in which old bone is removed and new bone is created to replace it, and for the production of red blood cells in bone marrow.  Mutations in the TBXAS1 gene severely reduce the activity of thromboxane A synthase 1. Studies suggest that a lack of this enzyme's activity may lead to abnormal bone remodeling and fibrosis of the bone marrow. However, the mechanism by which a shortage of thromboxane A synthase 1 activity leads to the particular abnormalities characteristic of Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia is unclear.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Ghosal syndrome  - National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: How is Anemia Diagnosed?  - National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: How is Anemia Treated?   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care