The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Microsomia hemifacial radial defects. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the radius 90% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the thumb 90% Facial asymmetry 90% Atresia of the external auditory canal 50% Cognitive impairment 50% Complete atrioventricular canal defect 50% Preauricular skin tag 50% Renal hypoplasia/aplasia 50% Sacrococcygeal pilonidal abnormality 50% Sensorineural hearing impairment 50% Short stature 50% Vertebral segmentation defect 50% Abnormality of the genital system 7.5% Aplasia/Hypoplasia affecting the eye 7.5% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the lungs 7.5% Cleft eyelid 7.5% Cleft palate 7.5% Conductive hearing impairment 7.5% Ectopic anus 7.5% Maternal diabetes 7.5% Non-midline cleft lip 7.5% Preaxial hand polydactyly 7.5% Triphalangeal thumb 7.5% Wide mouth 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Complete duplication of thumb phalanx - Microtia - Preauricular pit - Short mandibular rami - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Hemifacial microsomia (HFM) is a condition in which part of one side of the face is underdeveloped and does not grow normally. The eye, cheekbone, lower jaw, facial nerves, muscles, and neck may be affected. Other findings may include hearing loss from underdevelopment of the middle ear; a small tongue; and macrostomia (large mouth). HFM is the second most common facial birth defect after clefts. The cause of HFM in most cases is unknown. It usually occurs in people with no family history of HFM, but it is inherited in some cases. Treatment depends on age and the specific features and symptoms in each person.
 For most people with hemifacial microsomia, the cause is unknown. It is believed that something occurs in the early stages of development, such as a disturbance of the blood supply to the first and second branchial arches in the first 6 to 8 weeks of pregnancy. Studies have suggested multiple possible risk factors for hemifacial microsomia. Environmental risk factors include the use of medications during pregnancy such as Accutane, pseudoephedrine, aspirin, or ibuprofen. Other environmental factors include second trimester bleeding, maternal diabetes, being pregnant with multiples, or the use of assisted reproductive technology. A genetic cause is found in some families, such as a chromosome disorder or a genetic syndrome. Some possible explanations when the cause of hemifacial microsomia is unknown include a very small chromosome deletion or duplication that is not detected, a mutation in an unknown gene, or changes in multiple genes associated with development of the face. It is also possible that a combination of genetic changes and environmental risk factors could cause hemifacial microsomia.
 Hemifacial microsomia most often occurs in a single individual in a family and is not inherited. If the condition is caused by a chromosomal abnormality, it may be inherited from one affected parent or it may result from a new abnormality in the chromosome and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. In a very small number of cases, hemifacial microsomia is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of an altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In rare cases, the condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of a gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. The gene or genes involved in hemifacial microsomia are unknown. In some affected families, people seem to inherit an increased risk of developing hemifacial microsomia, not the condition itself. In these cases, some combination of genetic changes and environmental factors may be involved.
 Treatment of hemifacial microsomia varies depending on the features present and the severity in each affected person. Various types of surgeries may be needed in many cases. Some children need breathing support or a tracheostomy soon after birth if the jaw is severely affected. However in most cases, airway problems can be managed without surgery. Those with a jaw deformity and/or clefts may have feeding problems and may need supplemental feedings through a nasogastric tube to support growth and weight gain. Babies born with cleft lip or palate can have surgical repairs done during the first year. Cleft lip repair is typically performed when the child is 3-6 months old, while cleft palate surgery is generally performed when the child is about a year old. A lateral facial cleft, one of the most severe abnormalities associated with the condition, also requires reconstruction in stages. If eye closure is incomplete due to eyelid abnormalities or facial paralysis is present, a child may need eye protection or surgery. Surgery may also be used for eyelid differences to reposition the lower lids and corners of the eyes. Some children with abnormally shaped or missing ears may choose to have a series of reconstructive surgeries to make the ear appear more normal. Children with skin, cheek and other soft tissue deficiencies may need augmentation procedures such as fat grafting or tissue transfer. Severe bone abnormalities may require surgery as well. Because multiple body systems may be involved in hemifacial microsomia, affected people should continually be monitored for complications.