Hemochromatosis is a disease in which too much iron builds up in your body. Your body needs iron but too much of it is toxic. If you have hemochromatosis, you absorb more iron than you need. Your body has no natural way to get rid of the extra iron. It stores it in body tissues, especially the liver, heart, and pancreas. The extra iron can damage your organs. Without treatment, it can cause your organs to fail.    There are two types of hemochromatosis. Primary hemochromatosis is an inherited disease. Secondary hemochromatosis is usually the result of something else, such as anemia, thalassemia, liver disease, or blood transfusions.    Many symptoms of hemochromatosis are similar to those of other diseases. Not everyone has symptoms. If you do, you may have joint pain, fatigue, general weakness, weight loss, and stomach pain.    Your doctor will diagnose hemochromatosis based on your medical and family histories, a physical exam, and the results from tests and procedures. Treatments include removing blood (and iron) from your body, medicines, and changes in your diet.    NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
Neonatal hemochromatosis is a disease in which too much iron builds up in the body. In this form of hemochromatosis the iron overload begins before birth. This disease tends to progress rapidly and is characterized by liver damage that is apparent at birth or in the first day of life. There are a number of other forms of hemochromatosis. To learn more about these other forms click on the disease names listed below: Hemochromatosis type 1 Hemochromatosis type 2 Hemochromatosis type 3 Hemochromatosis type 4
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Neonatal hemochromatosis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal localization of kidney 90% Anteverted nares 90% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the nipples 90% Blepharophimosis 90% Congenital hepatic fibrosis 90% Hypoglycemia 90% Abnormal bleeding - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cholestasis - Cirrhosis - Congenital onset - Hepatic failure - Hepatic fibrosis - Hepatocellular necrosis - Increased serum ferritin - Increased serum iron - Intrauterine growth retardation - Nonimmune hydrops fetalis - Oligohydramnios - Prolonged neonatal jaundice - Rapidly progressive - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Hemochromatosis type 4 is a disease in which too much iron builds up in the body.  This extra iron is toxic to the body and can damage the organs. Hemochromatosis is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. It is caused by mutations in the SLC40A1 gene. Hemochromatosis may be aquired or hereditary. Hereditary hemochromatosis is classified by type depending on the age of onset and other factors such as genetic cause and mode of inheritance. To learn more about these types click on the disease names below: Hemochromatosis type 1 Hemochromatosis type 2 Hemochromatosis type 3 There is also a neonatal form of hemochromatosis: Neonatal hemochromatosis
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hemochromatosis type 4. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of iron homeostasis 90% Arthralgia 90% Generalized hyperpigmentation 90% Joint swelling 90% Limitation of joint mobility 90% Abdominal pain 50% Hepatic steatosis 50% Cirrhosis 7.5% Congenital hepatic fibrosis 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Hemochromatosis type 1 is a disease in which too much iron builds up in the body.  This extra iron is toxic to the body and can damage the organs. Hemochromatosis type 1 is the most common cause of hereditary hemochromatosis. Symptoms of this condition typically begin in adulthood. Early symptoms of hemochromatosis are nonspecific and may include fatigue, joint pain, abdominal pain, and loss of sex drive. Later signs and symptoms can include arthritis, liver disease, diabetes, heart abnormalities, and skin discoloration. Hemochromatosis type 1 is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner and is caused by mutations in the HFE gene. Hemochromatosis may be aquired or inherited. Hereditary hemochromatosis is classified by type depending on the age of onset and other factors such as genetic cause and mode of inheritance. To learn more about other types of hereditary hemochromatosis click on the disease names below: Hemochromatosis type 2 Hemochromatosis type 3 Hemochromatosis type 4 There is also a neonatal form of hemochromatosis: Neonatal hemochromatosis
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hemochromatosis type 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal glucose tolerance - Alopecia - Amenorrhea - Arrhythmia - Arthropathy - Ascites - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Azoospermia - Cardiomegaly - Cardiomyopathy - Cirrhosis - Congestive heart failure - Diabetes mellitus - Elevated hepatic transaminases - Hepatocellular carcinoma - Hepatomegaly - Hyperpigmentation of the skin - Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism - Impotence - Increased serum ferritin - Increased serum iron - Osteoporosis - Pleural effusion - Splenomegaly - Telangiectasia - Testicular atrophy - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
  Treatment for hemochromatosis might include phlebotomy, iron chelation therapy, dietary changes, and treatment for complications.The goal of treatment is to reduce the amount of iron in the body to normal levels, prevent or delay organ damage from excess iron, treat complications of hemochromatosis, and maintain normal amounts of iron throughout the lifetime. Phlebotomy aids in ridding the body of excess iron and maintaining normal iron stores. Most people begin treatment with weekly therapeutic phlebotomy of 500 mL whole blood-although sometimes treatment is initially twice a week. Maintenance phlebotomy usually involves treatment every 2-3 weeks in which 1 unit of blood is removed. For more detailed information regarding the treatment of hemochromatosis, please reference Medscape at the following link. You may need to register to view the article, but registration is free. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/177216-treatment
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hemochromatosis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal glucose tolerance - Alopecia - Amenorrhea - Arrhythmia - Arthropathy - Ascites - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Azoospermia - Cardiomegaly - Cardiomyopathy - Cirrhosis - Congestive heart failure - Diabetes mellitus - Elevated hepatic transaminases - Hepatocellular carcinoma - Hepatomegaly - Hyperpigmentation of the skin - Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism - Impotence - Increased serum ferritin - Increased serum iron - Osteoporosis - Pleural effusion - Splenomegaly - Telangiectasia - Testicular atrophy - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The underlying cause of hemochromatosis depends on whether a person has a hereditary form, an acquired form, or the neonatal form. Hereditary hemochromatosis is caused by mutations in any of several genes: type 1 hemochromatosis - the HFE gene type 2 hemochromatosis - either the HFE2 or HAMP gene type 3 hemochromatosis - the TFR2 gene type 4 hemochromatosis - the SLC40A1 gene These genes give the body instructions to make proteins that help regulate how iron is absorbed, transported, and stored. Mutations in these genes impair how iron is absorbed during digestion and alter the distribution of iron throughout the body. This causes iron to accumulate in tissues and organs. Acquired hemochromatosis (or secondary hemochromatosis) is usually due to other blood-related disorders, such as thalassemia or certain anemias, or having many blood transfusions. Sometimes it occurs as a result of long-term alcoholism or other health conditions. The cause of neonatal hemochromatosis is not fully understood. However, a woman with an affected child has approximately an 80% chance to have another affected child. This likelihood of recurrence is not explained by normal inheritance patterns. Therefore, this form appears to be familial, but not inherited.
 Hereditary hemochromatosis is inherited in an autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant manner, depending on the type a person has. Types 1, 2, and 3 are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that to be affected, a person must have a mutation in both copies of the responsible gene in each cell. Affected people inherit one mutated copy of the gene from each parent, who is referred to as a carrier. Carriers of an autosomal recessive condition typically do not have any signs or symptoms (they are unaffected). When 2 carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) chance to be affected, a 50% (1 in 2) chance to be an unaffected carrier like each parent, and a 25% chance to be unaffected and not be a carrier. Type 4 is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means having only one mutated copy of the responsible gene in each cell is enough to cause the condition. When a person with an autosomal dominant condition has children, each child has a 50% chance to inherit the mutated copy of the gene. In most cases, a person with type 4 hemochromatosis has one affected parent. Acquired hemochromatosis is not inherited. Neonatal hemochromatosis is also not inherited, but it does appear to be familial. A woman with an affected child has approximately an 80% chance to have another affected child. However, this likelihood of recurrence is not explained by normal inheritance patterns. The underlying cause of this type is not fully understood.
Hemochromatosis is one of the most common genetic diseases in the United States. It's most common in Caucasians of Northern European descent. The disease is less common in African Americans, Hispanics, Asians, and American Indians.
                
Primary hemochromatosis is more common in men than in women. Also, older people are more likely to develop the disease than younger people. In fact, signs and symptoms usually don't occur in men until they're 40 to 60 years old.
                
In women, signs and symptoms usually don't occur until after the age of 50 (after menopause). Young children rarely develop hemochromatosis.
                
Inheriting two faulty HFE genes (one from each parent) is the major risk factor for hemochromatosis. However, many people who have two copies of the faulty gene don't develop signs or symptoms of the disease.
                
Alcoholism is another risk factor for hemochromatosis. A family history of certain diseases and conditions also puts you at higher risk for hemochromatosis. Examples of such diseases and conditions include heart attack, liver disease, diabetes, arthritis, and erectile dysfunction (impotence).
Treatments for hemochromatosis include therapeutic phlebotomy (fleh-BOT-o-me), iron chelation (ke-LAY-shun) therapy, dietary changes, and treatment for complications.
                
The goals of treating hemochromatosis include:
                
Reducing the amount of iron in your body to normal levels
                
Preventing or delaying organ damage from iron overload
                
Treating complications of the disease
                
Maintaining a normal amount of iron in your body for the rest of your life
                
Therapeutic Phlebotomy
                
Therapeutic phlebotomy is a procedure that removes blood (and iron) from your body. A needle is inserted into a vein, and your blood flows through an airtight tube into a sterile container or bag.
                
The process is similar to donating blood; it can be done at blood donation centers, hospital donation centers, or a doctor's office.
                
In the first stage of treatment, about 1 pint of blood is removed once or twice a week. After your iron levels return to normal, you may continue phlebotomy treatments. However, you may need them less oftentypically every 24 months.
                
As long as treatment continues, which often is for the rest of your life, you'll need frequent blood tests to check your iron levels.
                
Iron Chelation Therapy
                
Iron chelation therapy uses medicine to remove excess iron from your body. This treatment is a good option for people who can't have routine blood removal.
                
The medicine used in iron chelation therapy is either injected or taken orally (by mouth). Injected iron chelation therapy is done at a doctor's office. Oral iron chelation therapy can be done at home.
                
Dietary Changes
                
Your doctor may suggest that you change your diet if you have hemochromatosis. You may be advised to:
                
Avoid taking iron, including iron pills, iron injections, or multivitamins that contain iron.
                
Limit your intake of vitamin C. Vitamin C helps your body absorb iron from food. Talk with your doctor about how much vitamin C is safe for you.
                
Avoid uncooked fish and shellfish. Some fish and shellfish contain bacteria that can cause infections in people who have chronic diseases, such as hemochromatosis.
                
Limit alcohol intake. Drinking alcohol increases the risk of liver disease. It also can make existing liver disease worse.
                
Treatment for Complications
                
Your doctor may prescribe other treatments as needed for complications such as liver disease, heart problems, or diabetes.
You can't prevent primary, or inherited, hemochromatosis. However, not everyone who inherits hemochromatosis genes develops symptoms or complications of the disease. In those who do, treatments can keep the disease from getting worse.
                
Treatments include therapeutic phlebotomy, iron chelation therapy, dietary changes, and other treatments. For more information, go to "How Is Hemochromatosis Treated?"
                
People who have hemochromatosis (or a family history of it) and are planning to have children may want to consider genetic testing and counseling. Testing will help show whether one or both parents have faulty HFE genes. A genetic counselor also can help figure out the likelihood of the parents passing the faulty genes on to their children.
Hereditary hemochromatosis is a disorder that causes the body to absorb too much iron from the diet. The excess iron is stored in the body's tissues and organs, particularly the skin, heart, liver, pancreas, and joints. Because humans cannot increase the excretion of iron, excess iron can overload and eventually damage tissues and organs. For this reason, hereditary hemochromatosis is also called an iron overload disorder.  Early symptoms of hereditary hemochromatosis are nonspecific and may include fatigue, joint pain, abdominal pain, and loss of sex drive. Later signs and symptoms can include arthritis, liver disease, diabetes, heart abnormalities, and skin discoloration. The appearance and progression of symptoms can be affected by environmental and lifestyle factors such as the amount of iron in the diet, alcohol use, and infections.  Hereditary hemochromatosis is classified by type depending on the age of onset and other factors such as genetic cause and mode of inheritance. Type 1, the most common form of the disorder, and type 4 (also called ferroportin disease) begin in adulthood. Men with type 1 or type 4 hemochromatosis typically develop symptoms between the ages of 40 and 60, and women usually develop symptoms after menopause.  Type 2 hemochromatosis is a juvenile-onset disorder. Iron accumulation begins early in life, and symptoms may appear in childhood. By age 20, decreased or absent secretion of sex hormones is evident. Females usually begin menstruation in a normal manner, but menses stop after a few years. Males may experience delayed puberty or symptoms related to a shortage of sex hormones. If the disorder is untreated, heart disease becomes evident by age 30.  The onset of type 3 hemochromatosis is usually intermediate between types 1 and 2. Symptoms of type 3 hemochromatosis generally begin before age 30.
Type 1 hemochromatosis is one of the most common genetic disorders in the United States, affecting about 1 million people. It most often affects people of Northern European descent. The other types of hemochromatosis are considered rare and have been studied in only a small number of families worldwide.
Mutations in the HAMP, HFE, HFE2, SLC40A1, and TFR2 genes cause hereditary hemochromatosis. Type 1 hemochromatosis results from mutations in the HFE gene, and type 2 hemochromatosis results from mutations in either the HFE2 or HAMP gene. Mutations in the TFR2 gene cause type 3 hemochromatosis, and mutations in the SLC40A1 gene cause type 4 hemochromatosis.  The proteins produced from these genes play important roles in regulating the absorption, transport, and storage of iron. Mutations in any of these genes impair the control of iron absorption during digestion and alter the distribution of iron to other parts of the body. As a result, iron accumulates in tissues and organs, which can disrupt their normal functions.
Types 1, 2, and 3 hemochromatosis are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. Most often, the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene but do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.  Type 4 hemochromatosis is distinguished by its autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. With this type of inheritance, one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person has one parent with the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of hereditary hemochromatosis:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: HFE-Associated Hereditary Hemochromatosis  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Juvenile Hereditary Hemochromatosis  - Gene Review: Gene Review: TFR2-Related Hereditary Hemochromatosis  - GeneFacts: Hereditary Hemochromatosis: Diagnosis  - GeneFacts: Hereditary Hemochromatosis: Management  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hemochromatosis type 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hemochromatosis type 2A  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hemochromatosis type 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hemochromatosis type 4  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hemochromatosis   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Without treatment, iron may build up in the organs and cause complications, including
                
- cirrhosis, or scarring of liver tissue  - diabetes  - irregular heart rhythms or weakening of the heart muscle  - arthritis  - erectile dysfunction
                
The complication most often associated with hemochromatosis is liver damage. Iron buildup in the liver causes cirrhosis, which increases the chance of developing liver cancer.
                
For some people, complications may be the first sign of hemochromatosis. However, not everyone with hemochromatosis will develop complications.
Iron is an essential nutrient found in many foods. Healthy people usually absorb less than 10 percent of iron in the food they eat.6 People with hemochromatosis absorb up to 30 percent of that iron.6 People with hemochromatosis can help prevent iron overload by
                
- eating only moderate amounts of iron-rich foods, such as red meat and organ meat  - avoiding supplements that contain iron  - avoiding supplements that contain vitamin C, which increases iron absorption
                
People with hemochromatosis can take steps to help prevent liver damage, including
                
- limiting the amount of alcoholic beverages they drink because alcohol increases their chance of cirrhosis and liver cancer  - avoiding alcoholic beverages entirely if they already have cirrhosis