Warm antibody hemolytic anemia is the most common form of autoimmune hemolytic anemia. It is defined by the presence of  autoantibodies that attach to and destroy red blood cells at temperatures equal to or greater than normal body temperature. The disease is characterized by symptoms related to anemia, including fatigue, difficulty breathing, jaundice and dark urine. In severe disease, fever, chest pain, syncope or heart failure may occur. Hemolysis (the breakdown of red blood cells) occurs mainly in the spleen, so mild splenomegaly is relatively common. Treatment typically involves a corticosteroid like prednisone. In cases that don't respond to treatment, splenectomy may be considered. Chronic and severe disease may be treated with Rituximab or immunosuppressive medications.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Warm antibody hemolytic anemia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of erythrocytes 90% Autoimmunity 90% Migraine 90% Pallor 90% Arthralgia 50% Hematological neoplasm 50% Skin rash 50% Abnormality of temperature regulation 7.5% Abnormality of the liver 7.5% Abnormality of urine homeostasis 7.5% Arrhythmia 7.5% Congestive heart failure 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) occurs when your immune system makes antibodies that attack your red blood cells. This causes a drop in the number of red blood cells, leading to hemolytic anemia. Symptoms may include unusual weakness and fatigue with tachycardia and breathing difficulties, jaundice, dark urine and/or splenomegaly. AIHA can be primary (idiopathic) or result from an underlying disease or medication. The condition may develop gradually or occur suddenly. There are two main types of autoimmune hemolytic anemia: warm antibody hemolytic anemia and cold antibody hemolytic anemia. Treatment may include corticosteroids such as prednisone, splenectomy, immunosuppressive drugs and/or blood transfusions.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Autoimmune hemolytic anemia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autoimmunity 90% Hemolytic anemia 90% Migraine 90% Muscle weakness 90% Pallor 90% Respiratory insufficiency 90% Abnormality of the liver 50% Lymphoma 50% Abdominal pain 7.5% Abnormality of temperature regulation 7.5% Abnormality of urine homeostasis 7.5% Arrhythmia 7.5% Congestive heart failure 7.5% Splenomegaly 7.5% Abnormality of metabolism/homeostasis - Autoimmune hemolytic anemia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 In about half of cases, the cause of autoimmune hemolytic anemia cannot be determined (idiopathic or primary). This condition can also be caused by or occur with another disorder (secondary) or rarely, occur following the use of certain drugs (such as penicillin) or after a person has a blood and marrow stem cell transplant. Secondary causes of autoimmune hemolytic anemia include:  Autoimmune diseases, such as lupus Chronic lymphocytic leukemia Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and other blood cancers Epstein-Barr virus Cytomegalovirus Mycoplasma pneumonia Hepatitis HIV
 In many cases, the cause of autoimmune hemolytic anemia remains unknown. Some researchers believe that there are multiple factors involved, including genetic and environmental influences (multifactorial). In a very small number of cases, autoimmune hemolytic anemia appears to run in families. In these cases, it appears to follow an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. If you have concerns about the specific risks in your family, we encourage you to consult with a genetics professional.
The immediate cause of hemolytic anemia is the early destruction of red blood cells. This means that red blood cells are destroyed and removed from the bloodstream before their normal lifespan is over.
                
Many diseases, conditions, and factors can cause the body to destroy its red blood cells. These causes can be inherited or acquired. "Inherited" means your parents passed the gene for the condition on to you. "Acquired" means you aren't born with the condition, but you develop it.
                
Sometimes, the cause of hemolytic anemia isn't known.
                
For more information about the specific causes of hemolytic anemia, go to "Types of Hemolytic Anemia."
                
Inherited Hemolytic Anemias
                
In inherited hemolytic anemias, the genes that control how red blood cells are made are faulty. You can get a faulty red blood cell gene from one or both of your parents.
                
Different types of faulty genes cause different types of inherited hemolytic anemia. However, in each type, the body makes abnormal red blood cells. The problem with the red blood cells may involve the hemoglobin, cell membrane, or enzymes that maintain healthy red blood cells.
                
The abnormal cells may be fragile and break down while moving through the bloodstream. If this happens, an organ called the spleen may remove the cell debris from the bloodstream.
                
Acquired Hemolytic Anemias
                
In acquired hemolytic anemias, the body makes normal red blood cells. However, a disease, condition, or other factor destroys the cells. Examples of conditions that can destroy the red blood cells include:
                
Immune disorders
                
Infections
                
Reactions to medicines or blood transfusions
                
Hypersplenism (HI-per-SPLEEN-izm; an enlarged spleen)
Hemolytic anemia can affect people of all ages and races and both sexes. Some types of hemolytic anemia are more likely to occur in certain populations than others.
                
For example, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency mostly affects males of African or Mediterranean descent. In the United States, the condition is more common among African Americans than Caucasians.
                
In the United States, sickle cell anemia mainly affects African Americans.
The signs and symptoms of hemolytic anemia will depend on the type and severity of the disease.
                
People who have mild hemolytic anemia often have no signs or symptoms. More severe hemolytic anemia may cause many signs and symptoms, and they may be serious.
                
Many of the signs and symptoms of hemolytic anemia apply to all types of anemia.
                
Signs and Symptoms of Anemia
                
The most common symptom of all types of anemia is fatigue (tiredness). Fatigue occurs because your body doesn't have enough red blood cells to carry oxygen to its various parts.
                
A low red blood cell count also can cause shortness of breath, dizziness, headache, coldness in your hands and feet, pale skin, and chest pain.
                
A lack of red blood cells also means that your heart has to work harder to move oxygen-rich blood through your body. This can lead to arrhythmias (irregular heartbeats), a heart murmur, an enlarged heart, or even heart failure.
                
Signs and Symptoms of Hemolytic Anemia
                
Jaundice
                
Jaundice refers to a yellowish color of the skin or whites of the eyes. When red blood cells die, they release hemoglobin into the bloodstream.
                
The hemoglobin is broken down into a compound called bilirubin, which gives the skin and eyes a yellowish color. Bilirubin also causes urine to be dark yellow or brown.
                
Pain in the Upper Abdomen
                
Gallstones or an enlarged spleen may cause pain in the upper abdomen. High levels of bilirubin and cholesterol (from the breakdown of red blood cells) can form into stones in the gallbladder. These stones can be painful.
                
The spleen is an organ in the abdomen that helps fight infection and filters out old or damaged blood cells. In hemolytic anemia, the spleen may be enlarged, which can be painful.
                
Leg Ulcers and Pain
                
In people who have sickle cell anemia, the sickle-shaped cells can clog small blood vessels and block blood flow. This can cause leg sores and pain throughout the body.
                
A Severe Reaction to a Blood Transfusion
                
You may develop hemolytic anemia due to a blood transfusion. This can happen if the transfused blood is a different blood type than your blood.
                
Signs and symptoms of a severe reaction to a transfusion include fever, chills, low blood pressure, and shock. (Shock is a life-threatening condition that occurs if the body isn't getting enough blood flow.)
You can't prevent inherited types of hemolytic anemia. One exception is glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency.
                
If you're born with G6PD deficiency, you can avoid substances that may trigger the condition. For example, avoid fava beans, naphthalene (a substance found in some moth balls), and certain medicines (as your doctor advises).
                
Some types of acquired hemolytic anemia can be prevented. For example, reactions to blood transfusions, which can cause hemolytic anemia, can be prevented. This requires careful matching of blood types between the blood donor and the recipient.
                
Prompt and proper prenatal care can help you avoid the problems of Rh incompatibility. This condition can occur during pregnancy if a woman has Rh-negative blood and her baby has Rh-positive blood. "Rh-negative" and "Rh-positive" refer to whether your blood has Rh factor. Rh factor is a protein on red blood cells.
                
Rh incompatibility can lead to hemolytic anemia in a fetus or newborn.