Hennekam syndrome is a rare condition that affects the lymphatic system. Signs and symptoms of the condition are generally noticeable at birth and vary significantly from person to person, even within the same family. Affected people generally experience lymphangiectasia (lymphatic vessels that are abnormally expanded), lymphedema, and distinctive facial features (i.e. a flattened appearance to the middle of the face, puffy eyelids, widely spaced eyes, small ears, and a small mouth). Other common features include intellectual disability, growth delay, respiratory problems, camptodactyly (permanently bent fingers and toes) and cutaneous syndactyly (fusion of the skin between the fingers and toes). Hennekam syndrome is caused by changes (mutations) in the CCBE1 or FAT4 genes and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
At least 50 cases of Hennekam syndrome have been reported worldwide.
Mutations in the CCBE1 or FAT4 gene can cause Hennekam syndrome.  The CCBE1 gene provides instructions for making a protein that is found in the lattice of proteins and other molecules outside the cell (extracellular matrix). The CCBE1 protein is involved in the maturation (differentiation) and movement (migration) of immature cells called lymphangioblasts that will eventually form the lining (epithelium) of lymphatic vessels.  The function of the protein produced from the FAT4 gene is largely unknown. Research shows that the FAT4 protein may be involved in determining the position of various components within cells (cell polarity).  CCBE1 gene mutations that cause Hennekam syndrome change the three-dimensional shape of the protein and severely decrease its function. The abnormal protein cannot play its role in the formation of the lymphatic vessel epithelium. The resulting malformation of lymphatic vessels leads to lymphangiectasia, lymphedema, and other features of Hennekam syndrome. Since the lymphatic system extends throughout the body, a disruption to the vessels can affect almost any organ. Altered lymphatic development before birth may change the balance of fluids and impair normal development, contributing to many of the other signs of Hennekam syndrome such as unusual facial features.  FAT4 gene mutations that cause Hennekam syndrome result in a FAT4 protein with decreased function. Reduced FAT4 protein activity seems to impair normal development of the lymphatic system, but the mechanism is unknown.  Together, mutations in the CCBE1 and FAT4 genes are responsible for approximately half of all Hennekam syndrome cases. The cause of the remaining cases is unknown.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Hennekam syndrome:  - Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children (UK): Primary Intestinal Lymphangiectasia Information  - Johns Hopkins Medicine: Lymphedema Management  - VascularWeb: Lymphedema   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care