Hepatitis* B is a virus, or infection, that causes liver disease and inflammation of the liver. Viruses can cause sickness. For example, the flu is caused by a virus. People can pass viruses to each other.
                
Inflammation is swelling that occurs when tissues of the body become injured or infected. Inflammation can cause organs to not work properly.
Anyone can get hepatitis B, but those more likely to are people who
                
- were born to a mother with hepatitis B  - are in contact with blood, needles, or body fluids at work  - live with someone who currently has an active hepatitis B infection  - have had more than one sex partner in the last 6 months or have a history of sexually transmitted disease  - are on kidney dialysisthe process of filtering wastes and extra water from the body by means other than the kidneys  - are taking medicines that suppress the immune system, such as steroids or chemotherapy medicines  - have lived in or travel often to parts of the world where hepatitis B is common  - are from Asian and Pacific Island nations  - are infected with HIV or hepatitis C  - have injected illegal drugs  - work or live in a prison  - had a blood transfusion or organ transplant before the mid-1980s
                
Also, men who have sex with men are more likely to get hepatitis B.
Most people do not have any symptoms of hepatitis B. Adults and children ages 5 and older may have one or more of the following symptoms:
                
- feeling tired  - muscle soreness  - upset stomach  - stomach pain  - fever  - loss of appetite  - diarrhea  - dark-yellow urine  - light-colored stools  - yellowish eyes and skin, called jaundice
                
When symptoms occur, they can begin 2 to 5 months after coming into contact with the virus. See a doctor right away if you or a child in your care has symptoms of hepatitis B.
A blood test will show if you have hepatitis B. Blood tests are done at a doctors office or outpatient facility. A blood sample is taken using a needle inserted into a vein in your arm or hand. The blood sample is sent to a lab to test for hepatitis B.
                
If you are at higher risk of getting hepatitis B, get tested. If you are pregnant, you should also get tested. Many people with hepatitis B do not know they are infected. Early diagnosis and treatment can help prevent liver damage.
                
Your doctor may suggest getting a liver biopsy if chronic hepatitis B is suspected. A liver biopsy is a test to take a small piece of your liver to look for liver damage. The doctor may ask you to stop taking certain medicines before the test. You may be asked to fast for 8 hours before the test.
                
During the test, you lie on a table with your right hand resting above your head. Medicine is applied to numb the area where the biopsy needle will be inserted. If needed, sedatives and pain medicine are also given. The doctor uses a needle to take a small piece of liver tissue. After the test, you must lie on your right side for up to 2 hours. You will stay 2 to 4 hours after the test before being sent home.
                
A liver biopsy is performed at a hospital or outpatient center by a doctor. The liver tissue is sent to a special lab where a doctor looks at the tissue with a microscope and sends a report to your doctor.
Hepatitis B is not usually treated unless it becomes chronic. Chronic hepatitis B is treated with medicines that slow or stop the virus from damaging the liver.
                
Medicines for Chronic Hepatitis B
                
Your doctor will choose medicines or a combination of medicines that are likely to work for you. The doctor will closely watch your symptoms and schedule regular blood tests to make sure treatment is working.
                
Medicines given by shots include
                
- interferon  - peginterferon
                
Medicines taken by mouth include
                
- adefovir  - entecavir  - lamivudine  - telbivudine  - tenofovir
                
The length of treatment varies. Talk with your doctor before taking other prescription medicines and over-the-counter medicines.
                
Liver Transplant
                
A liver transplant may be necessary if chronic hepatitis B causes severe liver damage that leads to liver failure. Symptoms of severe liver damage include the symptoms of hepatitis B and
                
- generalized itching  - a longer than usual amount of time for bleeding to stop  - easy bruising  - swollen stomach or ankles  - spiderlike blood vessels, called spider angiomas, that develop on the skin
                
Liver transplant is surgery to remove a diseased or injured liver and replace it with a healthy one from another person, called a donor. If your doctors tell you that you need a transplant, you should talk with them about the long-term demands of living with a liver transplant.
                
A team of surgeonsdoctors who specialize in surgeryperforms a liver transplant in a hospital. You will learn how to take care of yourself after you go home and about the medicines youll need to take to protect your new liver. Medicines taken after liver transplant surgery can prevent hepatitis B from coming back.
                
Testing for Liver Cancer
                
Having hepatitis B increases your risk for getting liver cancer, so your doctor may suggest an ultrasound test of the liver every 6 to 12 months. Finding cancer early makes it more treatable. Ultrasound is a machine that uses sound waves to create a picture of your liver. Ultrasound is performed at a hospital or radiology center by a specially trained technician. The image, called a sonogram, can show the livers size and the presence of cancerous tumors.
If you have chronic hepatitis B, you should do things to take care of yourself, including eating a healthy diet. Avoid drinking alcohol, which can harm the liver. Talk with your doctor before taking vitamins and other supplements.
Hepatitis* A is a virus, or infection, that causes liver disease and inflammation of the liver. Viruses can cause sickness. For example, the flu is caused by a virus. People can pass viruses to each other.
                
Inflammation is swelling that occurs when tissues of the body become injured or infected. Inflammation can cause organs to not work properly.
Anyone can get hepatitis A, but those more likely to are people who
                
- travel to developing countries  - live with someone who currently has an active hepatitis A infection  - use illegal drugs, including noninjection drugs  - have unprotected sex with an infected person  - provide child care
                
Also, men who have sex with men are more likely to get hepatitis A.
Most people do not have any symptoms of hepatitis A. If symptoms of hepatitis A occur, they include
                
- feeling tired  - muscle soreness  - upset stomach  - fever  - loss of appetite  - stomach pain  - diarrhea  - dark-yellow urine  - light-colored stools  - yellowish eyes and skin, called jaundice
                
Symptoms of hepatitis A can occur 2 to 7 weeks after coming into contact with the virus. Children younger than age 6 may have no symptoms. Older children and adults often get mild, flulike symptoms. See a doctor right away if you or a child in your care has symptoms of hepatitis A.
A blood test will show if you have hepatitis A. Blood tests are done at a doctors office or outpatient facility. A blood sample is taken using a needle inserted into a vein in your arm or hand. The blood sample is sent to a lab to test for hepatitis A.
Hepatitis A usually gets better in a few weeks without treatment. However, some people can have symptoms for up to 6 months. Your doctor may suggest medicines to help relieve your symptoms. Talk with your doctor before taking prescription and over-the-counter medicines.
                
See your doctor regularly to make sure your body has fully recovered. If symptoms persist after 6 months, then you should see your doctor again.
                
When you recover, your body will have learned to fight off a future hepatitis A infection. However, you can still get other kinds of hepatitis.
If you have hepatitis A, you should do things to take care of yourself, including eating a healthy diet. Avoid drinking alcohol, which can harm the liver. Talk with your doctor before taking vitamins and other supplements.
Hepatitis* C is a virus, or infection, that causes liver disease and inflammation of the liver. Viruses can cause sickness. For example, the flu is caused by a virus. People can pass viruses to each other.
                
Inflammation is swelling that occurs when tissues of the body become injured or infected. Inflammation can cause organs to not work properly.
Anyone can get hepatitis C, but those more likely to are people who
                
- were born to a mother with hepatitis C  - are in contact with blood or infected needles at work  - have had more than one sex partner in the last 6 months or have a history of sexually transmitted disease  - are on kidney dialysisthe process of filtering wastes and extra water from the body by means other than the kidneys  - are infected with HIV  - have injected illegal drugs  - have had tattoos or body piercings  - work or live in a prison  - had a blood transfusion or organ transplant before July 1992  - have hemophilia and received clotting factor before 1987
                
Also, men who have sex with men are more likely to get hepatitis C.
Most people do not have any symptoms until the hepatitis C virus causes liver damage, which can take 10 or more years to happen. Others may have one or more of the following symptoms:
                
- feeling tired  - muscle soreness  - upset stomach  - stomach pain  - fever  - loss of appetite  - diarrhea  - dark-yellow urine  - light-colored stools  - yellowish eyes and skin, called jaundice
                
When symptoms of hepatitis C occur, they can begin 1 to 3 months after coming into contact with the virus. See a doctor right away if you or a child in your care has symptoms of hepatitis C.
A blood test will show if you have hepatitis C. Blood tests are done at a doctors office or outpatient facility. A blood sample is taken using a needle inserted into a vein in your arm or hand. The blood sample is sent to a lab to test for hepatitis C.
                
If you are at higher risk of getting hepatitis C, get tested. Many people with hepatitis C do not know they are infected.
                
Your doctor may suggest getting a liver biopsy if chronic hepatitis C is suspected. A liver biopsy is a test to take a small piece of your liver to look for liver damage. The doctor may ask you to stop taking certain medicines before the test. You may be asked to fast for 8 hours before the test.
                
During the test, you lie on a table with your right hand resting above your head. Medicine is applied to numb the area where the biopsy needle will be inserted. If needed, sedatives and pain medicine are also given. The doctor uses a needle to take a small piece of liver tissue. After the test, you must lie on your right side for up to 2 hours. You will stay 2 to 4 hours after the test before being sent home.
                
A liver biopsy is performed at a hospital or outpatient center by a doctor. The liver sample is sent to a special lab where a doctor looks at the tissue with a microscope and sends a report to your doctor.
Hepatitis C is usually not treated unless it becomes chronic. Chronic hepatitis C is treated with medicines that slow or stop the virus from damaging the liver. Your doctor will closely watch your symptoms and schedule regular blood tests to make sure the treatment is working.
                
Medicines for Chronic Hepatitis C
                
Chronic hepatitis C is most often treated with a medicine combination that attacks the hepatitis C virus. Treatment may last from 24 to 48 weeks.
                
Today, newer treatments with medicine for chronic hepatitis C are appearing quickly. Talk with your doctor if you have questions about treatment.
                
Talk with your doctor before taking other prescription medicines and over-the-counter medicines.
                

                
Liver Transplant
                
A liver transplant may be necessary if chronic hepatitis C causes severe liver damage that leads to liver failure. Symptoms of severe liver damage include the symptoms of hepatitis C and
                
- generalized itching  - a longer than usual amount of time for bleeding to stop  - easy bruising  - swollen stomach or ankles  - spiderlike blood vessels, called spider angiomas, that develop on the skin
                
Liver transplant is surgery to remove a diseased or injured liver and replace it with a healthy one from another person, called a donor. If your doctors tell you that you need a transplant, you should talk with them about the long-term demands of living with a liver transplant.
                
A team of surgeonsdoctors who specialize in surgeryperforms a liver transplant in a hospital. You will learn how to take care of yourself after you go home and about the medicines youll need to take to protect your new liver. You will continue to take medicines because hepatitis C may come back after surgery.
                
Testing for Liver Cancer
                
Having hepatitis C increases your risk for liver cancer, so your doctor may suggest an ultrasound test of the liver every 6 to 12 months. Finding cancer early makes it more treatable. Ultrasound is a machine that uses sound waves to create a picture of your liver. Ultrasound is performed at a hospital or radiology center by a specially trained technician. The image, called a sonogram, can show the livers size and the presence of cancerous tumors.
If you have chronic hepatitis C, you should do things to take care of yourself, including eating a healthy diet. Avoid drinking alcohol, which can harm the liver. Talk with your doctor before taking vitamins and other supplements.