Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type V (HSAN5) is a condition that affects the sensory nerve cells. These cells, which are also called sensory neurons, transmit information about sensations such as pain, temperature, and touch. Signs and symptoms of the condition generally develop at birth or during early infancy and may include a loss of pain and temperature sensation. Because of the inability to feel deep pain, affected people suffer repeated severe injuries such as bone fractures and joint injuries that go unnoticed. HSAN5 is caused by changes (mutations) in the NGF gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Medical management is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person and is oriented to control hyperthermia (elevated body temperature) and prevent injury.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type V. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Anhidrosis 7.5% Episodic fever 5% Intellectual disability, mild 5% Acral ulceration and osteomyelitis leading to autoamputation of digits - Acral ulceration and osteomyelitis leading to autoamputation of the digits (feet) - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Infantile onset - Pain insensitivity - Painless fractures due to injury - Self-mutilation - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Hereditary sensory neuropathy type IE (HSNIE) is a progressive disorder of the central and peripheral nervous systems. Symptoms typically begin by age 20 to 35 and include sensory impairment of the lower legs and feet; loss of sweating in the hands and feet; sensorineural hearing loss; and gradual decline of mental ability (dementia). The severity of symptoms and age of onset vary, even within the same family. HSNIE is caused by a mutation in the DNMT1 gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. There is no effective treatment, but management may include injury prevention, the use of hearing aids, and sedative or antipsychotic medications for symptoms of dementia.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hereditary sensory neuropathy type IE. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Apathy - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Cerebral atrophy - Decreased number of peripheral myelinated nerve fibers - Dementia - Hyporeflexia - Impulsivity - Irritability - Memory impairment - Osteomyelitis - Progressive - Sensorineural hearing impairment - Sensory neuropathy - Somnolence - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
How  Hereditary sensory neuropathy type IE (HSNIE) is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that having only one changed (mutated) copy of the responsible gene in each cell is enough to cause features of the condition. When a person with a mutation that causes HSNIE has children, each child has a 50% (1/2) chance to inherit the mutated gene. A person who does not inherit the mutation from an affected parent is not at risk to pass the condition on to his/her children.
 There is currently no effective treatment for any type of hereditary sensory neuropathy. Management of symptoms may include: meticulous care of the distal limbs, which includes proper fit of shoes, prevention and treatment of callus formation, cleaning and protection of wounds, and avoidance of trauma to the hands and feet injury prevention when sensory impairment is significant the use of hearing aids and/or assistive communication methods as needed sedative or antipsychotic medications to help reduce the restlessness, roaming behavior, delusions, and hallucinations associated with dementia psychological support for caregivers
Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) with dystonia is a very rare variant of LHON where an individual has LHON associated with dystonia, which involves involuntary muscle contractions, tremors, and other unctrolled movements. It is caused by mutations in one of three mitochondrial genes: MT-ND1, MT-ND3, MT-ND4, and MT-ND6. Other features that have been associated with this condition include difficulty walking, muscle wasting, scoliosis, dysphagia, dysarthria, intellectual disability, dementia, and spasticity. The dystonia usually begins in childhood; vision loss may begin in early adulthood.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Leber hereditary optic neuropathy with dystonia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of eye movement - Athetosis - Bradykinesia - Dementia - Dysarthria - Dysphagia - Dystonia - Increased CSF lactate - Increased serum lactate - Intellectual disability - Leber optic atrophy - Mitochondrial inheritance - Optic atrophy - Peripheral neuropathy - Scoliosis - Skeletal muscle atrophy - Spasticity - Visual loss - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) is an inherited form of vision loss. Although this condition usually begins in a person's teens or twenties, rare cases may appear in early childhood or later in adulthood. For unknown reasons, males are affected much more often than females. This condition is caused by mutations in the MT-ND1, MT-ND4, MT-ND4L, and MT-ND6 genes.
 Leber hereditary optic neuropathy is a condition related to changes in mitochondrial DNA. Mutations in the MT-ND1, MT-ND4, MT-ND4L, and MT-ND6 genes cause LHON. These genes are contained in mitochondrial DNA. Mitochondria are structures within cells that convert the energy from food into a form that cells can use. Although most DNA is packaged in chromosomes within the nucleus, mitochondria also have a small amount of their own DNA (known as mitochondrial DNA or mtDNA). The genes related to Leber hereditary optic neuropathy each provide instructions for making a protein involved in normal mitochondrial function. These proteins are part of a large enzyme complex in mitochondria that helps convert oxygen and simple sugars to energy. Mutations in any of the genes disrupt this process. It remains unclear how these genetic changes cause the death of cells in the optic nerve and lead to the specific features of Leber hereditary optic neuropathy. Click here to visit the Genetic Home Reference Web site to learn more about how mutations in these genes cause Leber hereditary optic neuropathy.
 Leber hereditary optic neuropathy is an inherited condition that has a mitochondrial pattern of inheritance. The gene mutations that cause this condition are found in the mitochondrial DNA. Mitochondria are inherited from a person's mother, and as a result, only females pass mitochondrial conditions on to their children. Men can be affected, but they cannot pass the condition on to their children. Often, people who develop the features of Leber hereditary optic neuropathy have no family history of the condition. Because a person may carry a mitochondrial DNA mutation without experiencing any signs or symptoms, it is hard to predict which members of a family who carry a mutation will eventually develop vision loss or other medical problems associated with Leber hereditary optic neuropathy. It is important to note that all females with a mitochondrial DNA mutation, even those who do not have any signs or symptoms, will pass the genetic change to their children.
Hereditary sensory autonomic neuropathy (HSAN) is a group of rare peripheral neuropathies where neurons and/or axons are affected. The major feature of these conditions is the loss of large myelinated and unmyelinated fibers. Myelin is an insulating layer, or sheath that forms around nerves, made up of protein and fatty substances, that allows electrical impulses to transmit along the nerve cells. If myelin is damaged, these impulses slow down. Symptoms of HSAN include diminished sensation of pain and its associated consequences of delayed healing, Charcot arthopathies, infections, osteomyelitis, and amputations. They have been categorized into types one through five, although some children do not fit well into this classification and do not all have altered pain sensation and/or autonomic function.[9873] HSAN type I is the most common form of HSAN. It is caused by a mutation in the SPTLC1 gene and inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. HSAN type 2 is caused by mutations in the WNK1 gene and inheritance is autosomal recessive . HSAN type 3 (Riley-Day syndrome or familial dysautonomia) is caused by mutations in the IKBKAP gene and inheritance is autosomal recessive. HSAN type 4, also called congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis (CIPA), is caused by mutations in the NTRK1 gene and is an autosomal recessive disorder. HSAN type 5 is caused by mutations in the NGFB gene and inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Neuropathy, distal hereditary motor, Jerash type. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Split hand 5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Babinski sign - Decreased motor nerve conduction velocity - Distal amyotrophy - Distal muscle weakness - Foot dorsiflexor weakness - Hammertoe - Hyporeflexia - Pes cavus - Progressive - Spinal muscular atrophy - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Neuropathy, hereditary motor and sensory, Okinawa type. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Hand tremor 5% Adult onset - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Decreased number of peripheral myelinated nerve fibers - Degeneration of anterior horn cells - Distal sensory impairment - Fasciculations - Gait disturbance - Gliosis - Hyperlipidemia - Mildly elevated creatine phosphokinase - Peripheral neuropathy - Proximal amyotrophy - Proximal muscle weakness - Slow progression - Tetraplegia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Hereditary sensory neuropathy type 1 (HSN1) is a neurological condition characterized by nerve abnormalities in the legs and feet. Many people with this condition have tingling, weakness, and a reduced ability to feel pain and sense hot and cold. Some affected people do not lose sensation, but instead feel shooting pains in their legs and feet. As HSN1 progresses, sensory problems can affect the hands, arms, shoulders, and abdomen. In rare cases, people with this condition develop sensorineural hearing loss. Symptoms of HSN1 typically begin during a person's teens or twenties and worsen over time.  HSN1 is caused by mutations in any of several genes, depending on the form of HSN1 (HSN1A is caused by mutations in the SPTLC1 gene; HSN1B is linked to a gene located in chromosome 3; HSN1C is caused by mutations in the SPTLC2 gene; HSN1D is caused by mutations in the ATL1 gene and HSN1E is caused by mutations in DNMT1 gene. All forms of HSN1 are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. If symptoms are treated properly, the condition does not appear to affect life expectancy.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hereditary sensory neuropathy type 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the skin - Areflexia - Autoamputation (feet) - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Chronic axonal neuropathy - Decreased number of large peripheral myelinated nerve fibers - Decreased sensory nerve conduction velocity - Distal muscle weakness - Distal sensory impairment - Distal sensory loss of all modalities - Hyporeflexia - Osteomyelitis - Osteomyelitis or necrosis, distal, due to sensory neuropathy (feet) - Pes cavus - Sensorineural hearing impairment - Skeletal muscle atrophy - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
How  Hereditary sensory neuropathy type 1 (HSN1) is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that having only one changed (mutated) copy of the responsible gene in each cell is enough to cause signs and symptoms of the condition. When a person with an autosomal dominant condition has children, each child has a 50% (1 in 2) risk to inherit the mutated gene from the affected parent. In rare cases, a mutation that causes HSN1 occurs sporadically as a new (de novo) mutation in a person without an affected parent.
 At least four genes responsible for hereditary sensory neuropathy type 1 (HSN1) have been found: HSN1A (the most common form) is associated with mutations in the SPTLC1 gene HSN1B, reported in a small number of families, is linked to a specific location on chromosome 3, but the exact gene has not yet been identified HSN1C is caused by mutations in the SPTLC2 gene HSN1D is caused by mutations in the ATL1 gene (the same gene is associated with early-onset hereditary spastic paraplegia 3A) HSN1E is caused by mutations in the DNMT1 gene The Genetic Testing Registry (GTR) provides information about genetic testing for HSN1A. The intended audience for the GTR is health care providers and researchers. Patients and consumers with specific questions about a genetic test should contact a health care provider or a genetics professional. Although the genes for some other types of HSN1 have been identified, we are not aware of clinical laboratories that offer genetic testing for them. A genetics professional may be able to help you locate laboratories that offer testing for other types of HSN1. If the genetic mutation in an affected person has been identified, testing for adult relatives at risk for developing symptoms may be possible. This is called predictive genetic testing. However, this testing is not useful in predicting age of onset, severity, type of symptoms, or rate of progression in people who currently don't have symptoms.
 Management of hereditary sensory neuropathy type 1 generally follows the guidelines for diabetic foot care, including careful cleansing and protection of wounds and surgical care when needed. Pain medications may be used by those who experience shooting pains.
Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type II (HSAN2) is a condition that primarily affects the sensory nerve cells (sensory neurons), which transmit information about sensations such as pain, temperature, and touch. These sensations are impaired in people with HSAN2. In some affected people, the condition may also cause mild abnormalities of the autonomic nervous system, which controls involuntary body functions such as heart rate, digestion, and breathing. The signs and symptoms of HSAN2 typically begin in infancy or early childhood.  The first sign of HSAN2 is usually numbness in the hands and feet. Soon after, affected individuals lose the ability to feel pain or sense hot and cold. People with HSAN2 often develop open sores (ulcers) on their hands and feet. Because affected individuals cannot feel the pain of these sores, they may not seek treatment right away. Without treatment, the ulcers can become infected and may lead to amputation of the affected area. Unintentional self-injury is common in people with HSAN2, typically by biting the tongue, lips, or fingers. These injuries may lead to spontaneous amputation of the affected areas. Affected individuals often have injuries and fractures in their hands, feet, limbs, and joints that go untreated because of the inability to feel pain. Repeated injury can lead to a condition called Charcot joints, in which the bones and tissue surrounding joints are destroyed.  The effects of HSAN2 on the autonomic nervous system are more variable. Some infants with HSAN2 have trouble sucking, which makes it difficult for them to eat. People with HSAN2 may experience episodes in which breathing slows or stops for short periods (apnea); digestive problems such as the backflow of stomach acids into the esophagus (gastroesophageal reflux); or slow eye blink or gag reflexes. Affected individuals may also have weak deep tendon reflexes, such as the reflex being tested when a doctor taps the knee with a hammer.  Some people with HSAN2 lose a type of taste bud on the tip of the tongue called lingual fungiform papillae and have a diminished sense of taste.
HSAN2 is a rare disease; however, the prevalence is unknown.
There are two types of HSAN2, called HSAN2A and HSAN2B, each caused by mutations in a different gene. HSAN2A is caused by mutations in the WNK1 gene, and HSAN2B is caused by mutations in the FAM134B gene. Although two different genes are involved, the signs and symptoms of HSAN2A and HSAN2B are the same.  The WNK1 gene provides instructions for making multiple versions (isoforms) of the WNK1 protein. HSAN2A is caused by mutations that affect a particular isoform called the WNK1/HSN2 protein. This protein is found in the cells of the nervous system, including nerve cells that transmit the sensations of pain, temperature, and touch (sensory neurons). The mutations involved in HSAN2A result in an abnormally short WNK1/HSN2 protein. Although the function of this protein is unknown, it is likely that the abnormally short version cannot function properly. People with HSAN2A have a reduction in the number of sensory neurons; however, the role that WNK1/HSN2 mutations play in that loss is unclear.  HSAN2B is caused by mutations in the FAM134B gene. These mutations may lead to an abnormally short and nonfunctional protein. The FAM134B protein is found in sensory and autonomic neurons. It is involved in the survival of neurons, particularly those that transmit pain signals, which are called nociceptive neurons. When the FAM134B protein is nonfunctional, neurons die by a process of self-destruction called apoptosis.  The loss of neurons leads to the inability to feel pain, temperature, and touch sensations and to the impairment of the autonomic nervous system seen in people with HSAN2.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of HSAN2:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Hereditary Sensory and Autonomic Neuropathy Type II  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type IIA  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type IIB   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type IE (HSAN IE) is a disorder that affects the nervous system. Affected individuals have a gradual loss of intellectual function (dementia), typically beginning in their thirties. In some people with this disorder, changes in personality become apparent before problems with thinking skills.  People with HSAN IE also develop hearing loss that is caused by abnormalities in the inner ear (sensorineural hearing loss). The hearing loss gets worse over time and usually progresses to moderate or severe deafness between the ages of 20 and 35.  HSAN IE is characterized by impaired function of nerve cells called sensory neurons, which transmit information about sensations such as pain, temperature, and touch. Sensations in the feet and legs are particularly affected in people with HSAN IE. Gradual loss of sensation in the feet (peripheral neuropathy), which usually begins in adolescence or early adulthood, can lead to difficulty walking. Affected individuals may not be aware of injuries to their feet, which can lead to open sores and infections. If these complications are severe, amputation of the affected areas may be required.  HSAN IE is also characterized by a loss of the ability to sweat (sudomotor function), especially on the hands and feet. Sweating is a function of the autonomic nervous system, which also controls involuntary body functions such as heart rate, digestion, and breathing. These other autonomic functions are unaffected in people with HSAN IE.  The severity of the signs and symptoms of HSAN IE and their age of onset are variable, even within the same family.
HSAN IE is a rare disorder; its prevalence is unknown. Small numbers of affected families have been identified in populations around the world.
HSAN IE is caused by mutations in the DNMT1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called DNA (cytosine-5)-methyltransferase 1. This enzyme is involved in DNA methylation, which is the addition of methyl groups, consisting of one carbon atom and three hydrogen atoms, to DNA molecules. In particular, the enzyme helps add methyl groups to DNA building blocks (nucleotides) called cytosines.  DNA methylation is important in many cellular functions. These include determining whether the instructions in a particular segment of DNA are carried out or suppressed (gene silencing), regulating reactions involving proteins and fats (lipids), and controlling the processing of chemicals that relay signals in the nervous system (neurotransmitters). DNA (cytosine-5)-methyltransferase 1 is active in the adult nervous system. Although its specific function is not well understood, the enzyme may help regulate nerve cell (neuron) maturation and specialization (differentiation), the ability of neurons to migrate where needed and connect with each other, and neuron survival.  DNMT1 gene mutations that cause HSAN IE reduce or eliminate the enzyme's methylation function, resulting in abnormalities in the maintenance of the neurons that make up the nervous system. However, it is not known how the mutations cause the specific signs and symptoms of HSAN IE.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person has one parent with the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type IE:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: DNMT1-Related Dementia, Deafness, and Sensory Neuropathy  - University of Chicago: Center for Peripheral Neuropathy   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type V is a progressive disorder that affects nerve cells in the spinal cord. It results in muscle weakness and affects movement of the hands and feet.  Symptoms of distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type V usually begin during adolescence, but onset varies from infancy to the mid-thirties. Cramps in the hand brought on by exposure to cold temperatures are often the initial symptom.  The characteristic features of distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type V are weakness and wasting (atrophy) of muscles of the hand, specifically on the thumb side of the index finger and in the palm at the base of the thumb. Foot abnormalities, such as a high arch (pes cavus), are also common, and some affected individuals eventually develop problems with walking (gait disturbance). People with this disorder have normal life expectancies.
The incidence of distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type V is unknown. Only a small number of cases have been reported.
Mutations in the BSCL2 and GARS genes cause distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type V.  The BSCL2 gene provides instructions for making a protein called seipin, whose function is unknown. Mutations in the BSCL2 gene likely alter the structure of seipin, causing it to fold into an incorrect 3-dimensional shape. Research findings indicate that misfolded seipin proteins accumulate in the endoplasmic reticulum, which is a structure inside the cell that is involved in protein processing and transport. This accumulation likely damages and kills motor neurons (specialized nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord that control muscle movement), leading to muscle weakness in the hands and feet.  The GARS gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called glycyl-tRNA synthetase, which is involved in the production (synthesis) of proteins. It is unclear how GARS gene mutations lead to distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type V. The mutations probably reduce the activity of glycyl-tRNA synthetase. A reduction in the activity of this enzyme may impair transmission of nerve impulses. As a result, nerve cells slowly lose the ability to communicate with muscles in the hands and feet.  Mutations in other genes may also cause distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type V.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  Some people who have the altered gene never develop the condition, a situation known as reduced penetrance.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type V:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: BSCL2-Related Neurologic Disorders/Seipinopathy  - Gene Review: Gene Review: GARS-Associated Axonal Neuropathy  - Genetic Testing Registry: Distal hereditary motor neuronopathy type 5  - Genetic Testing Registry: Distal hereditary motor neuronopathy type 5B  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: High-Arched Foot   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type V (HSAN5) is a condition that primarily affects the sensory nerve cells (sensory neurons), which transmit information about sensations such as pain, temperature, and touch. These sensations are impaired in people with HSAN5.  The signs and symptoms of HSAN5 appear early, usually at birth or during infancy. People with HSAN5 lose the ability to feel pain, heat, and cold. Deep pain perception, the feeling of pain from injuries to bones, ligaments, or muscles, is especially affected in people with HSAN5. Because of the inability to feel deep pain, affected individuals suffer repeated severe injuries such as bone fractures and joint injuries that go unnoticed. Repeated trauma can lead to a condition called Charcot joints, in which the bones and tissue surrounding joints are destroyed.
HSAN5 is very rare. Only a few people with the condition have been identified.
Mutations in the NGF gene cause HSAN5. The NGF gene provides instructions for making a protein called nerve growth factor beta (NGF) that is important in the development and survival of nerve cells (neurons), including sensory neurons. The NGF protein functions by attaching (binding) to its receptors, which are found on the surface of neurons. Binding of the NGF protein to its receptor transmits signals to the cell to grow and to mature and take on specialized functions (differentiate). This binding also blocks signals in the cell that initiate the process of self-destruction (apoptosis). Additionally, NGF signaling plays a role in pain sensation. Mutation of the NGF gene leads to the production of a protein that cannot bind to the receptor and does not transmit signals properly. Without the proper signaling, sensory neurons die and pain sensation is altered, resulting in the inability of people with HSAN5 to feel pain.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of HSAN5:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital sensory neuropathy with selective loss of small myelinated fibers   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
The prevalence of LHON in most populations is unknown. It affects 1 in 30,000 to 50,000 people in northeast England and Finland.
Mutations in the MT-ND1, MT-ND4, MT-ND4L, or MT-ND6 gene can cause LHON. These genes are found in the DNA of cellular structures called mitochondria, which convert the energy from food into a form that cells can use. Although most DNA is packaged in chromosomes within the nucleus, mitochondria also have a small amount of their own DNA, known as mitochondrial DNA or mtDNA.  The genes associated with LHON each provide instructions for making a protein involved in normal mitochondrial function. These proteins are part of a large enzyme complex in mitochondria that helps convert oxygen, fats, and simple sugars to energy. Mutations in any of the genes disrupt this process. It remains unclear how these genetic changes cause the death of cells in the optic nerve and lead to the specific features of LHON.  A significant percentage of people with a mutation that causes LHON do not develop any features of the disorder. Specifically, more than 50 percent of males with a mutation and more than 85 percent of females with a mutation never experience vision loss or related health problems. Additional factors may determine whether a person develops the signs and symptoms of this disorder. Environmental factors such as smoking and alcohol use may be involved, although studies have produced conflicting results. Researchers are also investigating whether changes in additional genes contribute to the development of signs and symptoms.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Leber hereditary optic neuropathy:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Leber Hereditary Optic Neuropathy  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Mitochondrial Disorders Overview  - Genetic Testing Registry: Leber's optic atrophy  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Blindness  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Blindness - Resources   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type II is a progressive disorder that affects nerve cells in the spinal cord. It results in muscle weakness and affects movement, primarily in the legs.  Onset of distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type II ranges from the teenage years through mid-adulthood. The initial symptoms of the disorder are cramps or weakness in the muscles of the big toe and later, the entire foot. Over a period of approximately 5 to 10 years, affected individuals experience a gradual loss of muscle tissue (atrophy) in the lower legs. They begin to have trouble walking and running, and eventually may have complete paralysis of the lower legs. The thigh muscles may also be affected, although generally this occurs later and is less severe.  Some individuals with distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type II have weakening of the muscles in the hands and forearms. This weakening is less pronounced than in the lower limbs and does not usually result in paralysis.
The prevalence of distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type II is unknown. At least 25 affected families have been identified worldwide.
Mutations in the HSPB1 and HSPB8 genes cause distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type II. These genes provide instructions for making proteins called heat shock protein beta-1 and heat shock protein beta-8. Heat shock proteins help protect cells under adverse conditions such as infection, inflammation, exposure to toxins, elevated temperature, injury, and disease. They block signals that lead to programmed cell death. In addition, they appear to be involved in activities such as cell movement (motility), stabilizing the cell's structural framework (the cytoskeleton), folding and stabilizing newly produced proteins, and repairing damaged proteins. Heat shock proteins also appear to play a role in the tensing of muscle fibers (muscle contraction).  Heat shock protein beta-1 and heat shock protein beta-8 are found in cells throughout the body and are abundant in nerve cells. In nerve cells, heat shock protein beta-1 helps to organize a network of molecular threads called neurofilaments that maintain the diameter of specialized extensions called axons. Maintaining proper axon diameter is essential for the efficient transmission of nerve impulses. The function of heat shock protein beta-8 is not well understood, but studies have shown that it interacts with heat shock protein beta-1.  The HSPB1 and HSPB8 gene mutations that cause distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type II change single protein building blocks (amino acids) in the protein sequence. If either protein is altered, they may be more likely to cluster together and form clumps (aggregates). Aggregates of heat shock proteins may block the transport of substances that are essential for the proper function of nerve axons. The disruption of other cell functions in which these proteins are involved may also contribute to the signs and symptoms of distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type II.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of distal hereditary motor neuropathy, type II:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Distal hereditary motor neuronopathy type 2A  - Genetic Testing Registry: Distal hereditary motor neuronopathy type 2B  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Weakness   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Hereditary sensory neuropathy type IA is a condition characterized by nerve abnormalities in the legs and feet (peripheral neuropathy). Many people with this condition experience prickling or tingling sensations (paresthesias), numbness, and a reduced ability to feel pain and sense hot and cold. Some affected individuals do not lose sensation, but instead feel shooting pains in their legs and feet. As the disorder progresses, the sensory abnormalities can affect the hands, arms, shoulders, joints, and abdomen. Affected individuals may also experience muscle wasting and weakness as they get older. Weakness in the ankle muscles can make walking difficult. As the condition progresses, some people with hereditary sensory neuropathy type IA require wheelchair assistance.  Individuals with hereditary sensory neuropathy type IA typically get open sores (ulcers) on their feet or hands or infections of the soft tissue of the fingertips (whitlows) that are slow to heal. Because affected individuals cannot feel the pain of these sores, they may not seek immediate treatment. Without treatment, the ulcers can become infected and may require amputation of the surrounding area or limb.  Some people with hereditary sensory neuropathy type IA develop hearing loss caused by abnormalities of the inner ear (sensorineural hearing loss). Hearing loss typically develops in middle to late adulthood.  The signs and symptoms of hereditary sensory neuropathy type IA can begin anytime between adolescence and late adulthood. While the features of this condition tend to worsen over time, affected individuals have a normal life expectancy if signs and symptoms are properly treated.
Hereditary sensory neuropathy type IA is a rare condition; its prevalence is estimated to be 1 to 2 per 100,000 individuals.
Mutations in the SPTLC1 gene cause hereditary sensory neuropathy type IA. The SPTLC1 gene provides instructions for making one part (subunit) of an enzyme called serine palmitoyltransferase (SPT). The SPT enzyme is involved in making certain fats called sphingolipids. Sphingolipids are important components of cell membranes and play a role in many cell functions.  SPTLC1 gene mutations reduce the amount of functional SPTLC1 subunit that is produced, which results in an SPT enzyme with altered activity. This altered enzyme makes molecules called deoxysphingoid bases, which it does not normally produce. Because of this new function, the SPT enzyme's production of sphingolipid is reduced. Overall, there does not seem to be a decrease in sphingolipid production because the body is able to compensate for the SPT enzyme's reduced production. When accumulated, deoxysphingoid bases are toxic to neurons. The gradual destruction of nerve cells caused by the buildup of these toxic molecules results in loss of sensation and muscle weakness in people with hereditary sensory neuropathy type IA. Although the SPT enzyme does not produce a normal amount of sphingolipids, the body is able to compensate, and there does not seem to be an overall reduction of these fats in the body.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of hereditary sensory neuropathy type IA:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Hereditary Sensory Neuropathy Type IA  - Genetic Testing Registry: Neuropathy hereditary sensory and autonomic type 1  - Rare Diseases Clinical Research Network: Inherited Neuropathies Consortium  - The Foundation for Peripheral Neuropathy: Symptoms   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care