Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy is a syndrome with a wide range of manifestations including short stature, obesity, round face, subcutaneous (under the skin) ossifications (gradual replacement of cartilage by bone), and characteristic shortening and widening of the bones in the hands and feet (brachydactyly). The features of Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy are associated with resistance to parathyroid hormone (pseudohypoparathyroidism) and to other hormones (thyroid-stimulation hormone, in particular). This autosomal dominantly inherited condition is caused by mutations in the GNAS gene. Treatment consists of calcium and vitamin D supplements.
 Albright's hereditary osteodystophy is caused by mutations in the GNAS gene. Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy is transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait. The hormone resistance associated with Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy, in particular resistance to parathyroid hormone, depends on whether the mutated allele comes from the father or the mother. Within a family, some patients have isolated features of Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy without hormone resistance (called pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism) and some show the complete clinical picture. This is due to parental imprinting of the GNAS gene. Thus, in individuals with a mutated maternal GNAS allele, the disease is fully expressed while in individuals with a mutated paternal allele the disease is partially expressed and hormone resistance is not present.
 This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. People normally inherit one copy of each gene from their mother and one copy from their father. For most genes, both copies are active, or "turned on," in all cells. For a small subset of genes, however, only one of the two copies is active. For some of these genes, only the copy inherited from a person's father (the paternal copy) is active, while for other genes, only the copy inherited from a person's mother (the maternal copy) is active. These differences in gene activation based on the gene's parent of origin are caused by a phenomenon called genomic imprinting. The GNAS gene has a complex genomic imprinting pattern. In some cells of the body the maternal copy of the gene is active, while in others the paternal copy is active. Progressive osseous heteroplasia occurs when mutations affect the paternal copy of the gene. Thus, progressive heteroplasia is usually inherited from the father.
 Treatment with calcium and vitamin D supplements help maintain normal levels of calcium in the blood. If there are high levels of phosphate in the blood, it may be recommended to eat a low-phosphorous diet or take medications called phosphate binders to help lower the levels of phosphate. Examples of phosphate binders include calcium carbonate, calcium acetate, and sevelamer HCl.