Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is an immune disorder characterized by recurrent episodes of severe swelling. The most commonly affected areas of the body are the limbs, face, intestinal tract, and airway. HAE is caused by low levels or improper function of a protein called C1 inhibitor which affects the blood vessels. This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.
 Hereditary angioedema is characterized by recurrent episodes of severe swelling (angioedema). The most commonly involved areas of the body are the limbs, face, intestinal tract, and airway. While minor trauma or stress may trigger an attack, swelling often occurs without a known trigger. Episodes involving the intestinal tract cause severe abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. Swelling in the airway can restrict breathing and lead to life-threatening obstruction of the airway. About one-third of people with this condition develop a non-itchy rash called erythema marginatum during an attack. Symptoms of hereditary angioedema typically begin in childhood and worsen during puberty. Untreated individuals may have an attack every 1 to 2 weeks. Most episodes last 3 to 4 days. The frequency and duration of attacks vary greatly among individuals with hereditary angioedema, even among those in the same family. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hereditary angioedema. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Edema 90% Urticaria 90% Abdominal pain 7.5% Ascites 7.5% Immunologic hypersensitivity 7.5% Intestinal obstruction 7.5% Abnormality of the larynx - Angioedema - Autoimmunity - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Diarrhea - Erythema - Intestinal edema - Laryngeal edema - Peripheral axonal neuropathy - Pharyngeal edema - Vomiting - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Medical treatment of hereditary angioedema (HAE) consists of preventing attacks and managing acute attacks once they occur. During attacks, patients may require respiratory support. They also may require large amounts of intravenous fluids to maintain hemodynamic stability. Until recently, no effective agent for acute attacks existed in the United States. Now, however, several agents have been approved, and others are in the midst of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval process. In October 2008, the US FDA approved the use of C1-INH (Cinryze) for prophylaxis to prevent attacks. In October 2009, the FDA approved C1-INH (Berinert) for the treatment of acute abdominal and facial angioedema attacks in adolescents and adults with HAE.In December 2009, ecallantide (Kalbitor), a kallikrein inhibitor, was approved for the treatment of acute attacks.  In August 2011, the FDA approved Firazyr (icatibant) Injection for the treatment of acute attacks in people ages 18 years and older.  Firazyr can be self-administered through an injection in the abdominal area so patients can treat themselves when they realize they are having an  HAE attack. An article from the eMedicine Journal provides more detailed information on these medications and other methods of treating HAE at the following link. You may need to register to view the article, but registration is free. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/135604-treatment  The US Hereditary Angioedema Association also provides additional information about treatment of HAE.   http://www.haea.org/treating-hae/treatments/ Orphanet, a database dedicated to information on rare diseases and orphan drugs, provides guidelines regarding emergency management of hereditary angioedema at the following link. http://www.orpha.net/consor/cgi-bin/Disease_Emergency.php?lng=EN&stapage=FICHE_URGENCE_A1
Hereditary angioedema is a disorder characterized by recurrent episodes of severe swelling (angioedema). The most common areas of the body to develop swelling are the limbs, face, intestinal tract, and airway. Minor trauma or stress may trigger an attack, but swelling often occurs without a known trigger. Episodes involving the intestinal tract cause severe abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. Swelling in the airway can restrict breathing and lead to life-threatening obstruction of the airway. About one-third of people with this condition develop a non-itchy rash called erythema marginatum during an attack.  Symptoms of hereditary angioedema typically begin in childhood and worsen during puberty. On average, untreated individuals have an attack every 1 to 2 weeks, and most episodes last for about 3 to 4 days. The frequency and duration of attacks vary greatly among people with hereditary angioedema, even among people in the same family.  There are three types of hereditary angioedema, called types I, II, and III, which can be distinguished by their underlying causes and levels of a protein called C1 inhibitor in the blood. The different types have similar signs and symptoms. Type III was originally thought to occur only in women, but families with affected males have been identified.
Hereditary angioedema is estimated to affect 1 in 50,000 people. Type I is the most common, accounting for 85 percent of cases. Type II occurs in 15 percent of cases, and type III is very rare.
Mutations in the SERPING1 gene cause hereditary angioedema type I and type II. The SERPING1 gene provides instructions for making the C1 inhibitor protein, which is important for controlling inflammation. C1 inhibitor blocks the activity of certain proteins that promote inflammation. Mutations that cause hereditary angioedema type I lead to reduced levels of C1 inhibitor in the blood, while mutations that cause type II result in the production of a C1 inhibitor that functions abnormally. Without the proper levels of functional C1 inhibitor, excessive amounts of a protein fragment (peptide) called bradykinin are generated. Bradykinin promotes inflammation by increasing the leakage of fluid through the walls of blood vessels into body tissues. Excessive accumulation of fluids in body tissues causes the episodes of swelling seen in individuals with hereditary angioedema type I and type II.  Mutations in the F12 gene are associated with some cases of hereditary angioedema type III. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called coagulation factor XII. In addition to playing a critical role in blood clotting (coagulation), factor XII is also an important stimulator of inflammation and is involved in the production of bradykinin. Certain mutations in the F12 gene result in the production of factor XII with increased activity. As a result, more bradykinin is generated and blood vessel walls become more leaky, which leads to episodes of swelling in people with hereditary angioedema type III.  The cause of other cases of hereditary angioedema type III remains unknown. Mutations in one or more as-yet unidentified genes may be responsible for the disorder in these cases.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of hereditary angioedema:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary C1 esterase inhibitor deficiency - dysfunctional factor  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary angioneurotic edema  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary angioneurotic edema with normal C1 esterase inhibitor activity  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hereditary angioedema   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care