Infantile-onset ascending hereditary spastic paralysis is a motor neuron disease characterized by progressive weakness and stiffness of muscles in the arms, legs, and face. Initial symptoms usually occur within the first 2 years of life and include weakness of the legs, leg muscles that are abnormally tight and stiff, and eventual paralysis of the legs. Over time, muscle weakness and stiffness travels up (ascends) the body from the legs to the head. Infantile-onset ascending hereditary spastic paralysisis caused by mutations in the ALS2 gene, and this condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Infantile-onset ascending hereditary spastic paralysis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal pyramidal signs 90% Feeding difficulties in infancy 90% Hemiplegia/hemiparesis 90% Hyperreflexia 90% Hypertonia 90% Neurological speech impairment 90% Abnormality of eye movement 50% Pseudobulbar signs 50% Abnormal lower motor neuron morphology - Abnormality of the corticospinal tract - Abnormality of the eye - Abnormality of the face - Achilles tendon contracture - Anarthria - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Babinski sign - Chewing difficulties - Dysarthria - Infantile onset - Motor delay - Muscle weakness - Pes cavus - Progressive - Scoliosis - Slow progression - Spastic paraplegia - Spastic tetraplegia - Tetraplegia - Urinary incontinence - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Infantile-onset ascending hereditary spastic paralysis is one of a group of genetic disorders known as hereditary spastic paraplegias. These disorders are characterized by progressive muscle stiffness (spasticity) and eventual paralysis of the lower limbs (paraplegia). The spasticity and paraplegia result from degeneration (atrophy) of motor neurons, which are specialized nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord that control muscle movement. Hereditary spastic paraplegias are divided into two types: pure and complicated. The pure types involve only the lower limbs, while the complicated types involve additional areas of the nervous system, affecting the upper limbs and other areas of the body. Infantile-onset ascending hereditary spastic paralysis starts as a pure hereditary spastic paraplegia, with spasticity and weakness in the legs only, but as the disorder progresses, the muscles in the arms, neck, and head become involved and features of the disorder are more characteristic of the complicated type.  Affected infants are typically normal at birth, then within the first 2 years of life, the initial symptoms of infantile-onset ascending hereditary spastic paralysis appear. Early symptoms include exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia) and recurrent muscle spasms in the legs. As the condition progresses, affected children develop abnormal tightness and stiffness in the leg muscles and weakness in the legs and arms. Over time, muscle weakness and stiffness travels up (ascends) the body from the legs to the head and neck. Muscles in the head and neck usually weaken during adolescence; symptoms include slow eye movements and difficulty with speech and swallowing. Affected individuals may lose the ability to speak (anarthria). The leg and arm muscle weakness can become so severe as to lead to paralysis; as a result affected individuals require wheelchair assistance by late childhood or early adolescence. Intelligence is not affected in this condition.  A condition called juvenile primary lateral sclerosis shares many of the features of infantile-onset ascending hereditary spastic paralysis. Both conditions have the same genetic cause and significantly impair movement beginning in childhood; however, the pattern of nerve degeneration is different. Because of their similarities, these conditions are sometimes considered the same disorder.
Infantile-onset ascending hereditary spastic paralysis is a rare disorder, with at least 30 cases reported in the scientific literature.
Infantile-onset ascending hereditary spastic paralysis is caused by mutations in the ALS2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making the alsin protein. Alsin is produced in a wide range of tissues, with highest amounts in the brain, particularly in motor neurons. Alsin turns on (activates) multiple proteins called GTPases that convert a molecule called GTP into another molecule called GDP. GTPases play important roles in several cell processes. The GTPases that are activated by alsin are involved in the proper placement of the various proteins and fats that make up the cell membrane, the transport of molecules from the cell membrane to the interior of the cell (endocytosis), and the development of specialized structures called axons and dendrites that project from neurons and are essential for the transmission of nerve impulses.  Mutations in the ALS2 gene alter the instructions for making alsin, often resulting in the production of an abnormally short alsin protein that is unstable and rapidly broken down. It is unclear exactly how ALS2 gene mutations cause infantile-onset ascending hereditary spastic paralysis. Research suggests that a lack of alsin and the subsequent loss of GTPase functions, such as endocytosis and the development of axons and dendrites, contribute to the progressive atrophy of motor neurons that is characteristic of this condition.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of infantile-onset ascending hereditary spastic paralysis:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: ALS2-Related Disorders  - Genetic Testing Registry: Infantile-onset ascending hereditary spastic paralysis   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care