Hereditary endotheliopathy with retinopathy, nephropathy, and stroke (HERNS) is a rare genetic condition that affects the vascular endothelium (the inner lining of the arteries and blood vessels). Specifically, the small blood vessels of the brain (microangiopathy); retina (vascular retinopathy); and kidneys are affected. Signs and symptoms may include progressive adult onset vision loss, psychiatric disturbances, stroke-like episodes, neurologic decline, and kidney disease. HERNS is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. The term retinal vasculopathy with cerebral leukodystrophy (RVCL) has recently been adopted to include HERNS; cerebroretinal vasculopathy (CRV); and hereditary vascular retinopathy (HVR); historically, these 3 conditions have been considered distinct. Genetic studies have shown that these 3 conditions are likely variations of RVCL and are caused by mutations in the TREX1 gene.
 Hereditary endotheliopathy with retinopathy, nephropathy, and stroke (HERNS) is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that having a mutation in only one copy of the gene responsible for the condition is sufficient to cause signs and symptoms of HERNS. When an individual with HERNS has children, each child has a 50% (1 in 2) chance to inherit the mutated gene. The term retinal vasculopathy with cerebral leukodystrophy (RVCL) has recently been adopted to include HERNS; cerebroretinal vasculopathy (CRV); and hereditary vascular retinopathy (HVR); historically, these 3 conditions have been considered distinct. However, recent genetic studies have shown that these 3 conditions are likely variations of RVCL and are now known to be caused by mutations in the TREX1 gene.
 At this time there is no effective treatment for hereditary endotheliopathy with retinopathy, nephropathy, and stroke (HERNS). Treatment of HERNS is largely palliative, which means that it is aimed at decreasing pain and suffering by providing treatments for relief of symptoms along with comfort and support. In some cases, aspirin may be recommended. Laser treatment to prevent retinal hemorrhage may be beneficial to some affected individuals. A continuous maintenance dose of corticosteroids may be prescribed to manage cerebral edema (swelling in the brain).