Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is the lack of development before birth of all or part of the diaphragm, which normally separates the organs in the abdomen from those in the chest cavity. It can range in severity from a thinned area in the diaphragm to its complete absence. CDH may allow the stomach and intestines to move into the chest cavity, crowding the heart and lungs. This can then lead to underdevelopment of the lungs (pulmonary hypoplasia), potentially causing life-threatening complications. CDH has many different causes and occurs with other malformations in some cases. Treatment options depend on the severity of the defect.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Congenital diaphragmatic hernia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Congenital diaphragmatic hernia 90% Multifactorial inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) can occur as an isolated finding, as part of a genetic syndrome or chromosome abnormality, or as part of a complex but nonsyndromic set of findings. Currently, about 15%-20% of individuals with CDH have an identifiable cause for their diaphragm defect. These individuals are classified as having syndromic CDH either resulting from a recognized chromosome abnormality or as a single gene disorder. In the remaining 80%-85% of individuals with CDH, the cause is not known. Potential causes in these individuals may include: a currently undetectable chromosomal microdeletion (tiny loss of genetic material) or microduplication (an extra copy of genetic material) a mutation in a major gene important for diaphragm development combined effects of multiple minor genetic mutations or variants (polygenic inheritance) effects of gene-environment interactions (multifactorial inheritance) effects of non-genetic factors (e.g. epigenetic or teratogenic) GeneReviews has more detailed information about causes of CDH; this information can be viewed by clicking here.
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia is a defect in the diaphragm. The diaphragm, which is composed of muscle and other fibrous tissue, separates the organs in the abdomen from those in the chest. Abnormal development of the diaphragm before birth leads to defects ranging from a thinned area in the diaphragm to its complete absence. An absent or partially formed diaphragm results in an abnormal opening (hernia) that allows the stomach and intestines to move into the chest cavity and crowd the heart and lungs. This crowding can lead to underdevelopment of the lungs (pulmonary hypoplasia), potentially resulting in life-threatening breathing difficulties that are apparent from birth.  In 5 to 10 percent of affected individuals, signs and symptoms of congenital diaphragmatic hernia appear later in life and may include breathing problems or abdominal pain from protrusion of the intestine into the chest cavity. In about 1 percent of cases, congenital diaphragmatic hernia has no symptoms; it may be detected incidentally when medical imaging is done for other reasons.  Congenital diaphragmatic hernias are often classified by their position. A Bochdalek hernia is a defect in the side or back of the diaphragm. Between 80 and 90 percent of congenital diaphragmatic hernias are of this type. A Morgnani hernia is a defect involving the front part of the diaphragm. This type of congenital diaphragmatic hernia, which accounts for approximately 2 percent of cases, is less likely to cause severe symptoms at birth. Other types of congenital diaphragmatic hernia, such as those affecting the central region of the diaphragm, or those in which the diaphragm muscle is absent with only a thin membrane in its place, are rare.
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia affects approximately 1 in 2,500 newborns.
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia has many different causes. In 10 to 15 percent of affected individuals, the condition appears as a feature of a disorder that affects many body systems, called a syndrome. Donnai-Barrow syndrome, Fryns syndrome, and Pallister-Killian mosaic syndrome are among several syndromes in which congenital diaphragmatic hernia may occur. Some of these syndromes are caused by changes in single genes, and others are caused by chromosomal abnormalities that affect several genes.  About 25 percent of individuals with congenital diaphragmatic hernia that is not associated with a known syndrome also have abnormalities of one or more major body systems. Affected body systems can include the heart, brain, skeleton, intestines, genitals, kidneys, or eyes. In these individuals, the multiple abnormalities likely result from a common underlying disruption in development that affects more than one area of the body, but the specific mechanism responsible for this disruption is not clear.  Approximately 50 to 60 percent of congenital diaphragmatic hernia cases are isolated, which means that affected individuals have no other major malformations.  More than 80 percent of individuals with congenital diaphragmatic hernia have no known genetic syndrome or chromosomal abnormality. In these cases, the cause of the condition is unknown. Researchers are studying changes in several genes involved in the development of the diaphragm as possible causes of congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Some of these genes are transcription factors, which provide instructions for making proteins that help control the activity of particular genes (gene expression). Others provide instructions for making proteins involved in cell structure or the movement (migration) of cells in the embryo. Environmental factors that influence development before birth may also increase the risk of congenital diaphragmatic hernia, but these environmental factors have not been identified.
Isolated congenital diaphragmatic hernia is rarely inherited. In almost all cases, there is only one affected individual in a family.  When congenital diaphragmatic hernia occurs as a feature of a genetic syndrome or chromosomal abnormality, it may cluster in families according to the inheritance pattern for that condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of congenital diaphragmatic hernia:  - Boston Children's Hospital  - Children's Hospital of Philadelphia  - Columbia University Medical Center: DHREAMS  - Columbia University Medical Center: Hernia Repair  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia Overview  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital diaphragmatic hernia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Diaphragmatic hernia 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Diaphragmatic hernia 3  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Diaphragmatic Hernia Repair  - Seattle Children's Hospital: Treatment of Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia  - University of California, San Francisco Fetal Treatment Center: Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia  - University of Michigan Health System   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care