Dermatitis herpetiformis is a rare, chronic, skin disorder characterized by groups of severely itchy blisters and raised skin lesions. These are more common on the knees, elbows, buttocks and shoulder blades. The slow onset of symptoms usually begins during adulthood, but children can also be affected. Other symptoms may include fluid-filled sores; red lesions that resemble hives; and itchiness, redness and burning. The exact cause of this disease is not known, but it is frequently associated with the inability to digest gluten. People with this disease are typically treated with the drug dapsone.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Dermatitis herpetiformis . If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal blistering of the skin 90% Autoimmunity 90% Hypermelanotic macule 90% Malabsorption 90% Microcytic anemia 90% Pruritus 90% Recurrent fractures 90% Urticaria 90% Eczema 50% Bone pain 7.5% Edema 7.5% Lichenification 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The antibiotic dapsone is extremely effective in treating this condition. Symptomatic improvement may occur in as little as several hours after the first dose. However, dapsone may cause serious side effects and requires regular monitoring by a physician. When this medication is used to relieve the symptoms of dermatitis herpetiformis, it should be taken in the smallest effective dose and for the shortest period possible. In some cases, immunosuppressive medications may be used. These medications do not appear to be as effective. A strict gluten-free diet is also recommended to help control the disease. Following this diet may eliminate the need for medications and prevent later complications.
Dermatitis herpetiformis is characterized by small, clustered papules and vesicles that erupt symmetrically on the elbows, knees, buttocks, back, or scalp. The face and groin can also be involved. A burning sensation may precede lesion formation. Lesions are usually scratched off by the time a patient comes in for a physical exam, and the rash may appear as erosions and excoriations.
                
Patients with DH may also experience dental enamel defects to permanent teeth, which is another manifestation of celiac disease. Less than 20 percent of people with DH have symptoms of celiac disease.3
Dermatitis herpetiformis is caused by the deposit of immunoglobulin A (IgA) in the skin, which triggers further immunologic reactions resulting in lesion formation. DH is an external manifestation of an abnormal immune response to gluten, in which IgA antibodies form against the skin antigen epidermal transglutaminase.
                
Family studies show that 5 percent of first-degree relatives of a person with DH will also have DH. An additional 5 percent of first-degree relatives of a person with DH will have celiac disease.4 Various other autoimmune diseases are associated with DH, the most common being hypothyroidism.
A skin biopsy is the first step in diagnosing DH. Direct immunofluorescence of clinically normal skin adjacent to a lesion shows granular IgA deposits in the upper dermis. Histology of lesional skin may show microabscesses containing neutrophils and eosinophils. However, histology may reveal only excoriation due to the intense itching that patients experience.
                
Blood tests for antiendomysial or anti-tissue transglutaminase antibodies may also suggest celiac disease. Blood tests for epidermal transglutaminase antibodies are positive in more than 90 percent of cases.5 All of these tests will become negative with prolonged adherence to a gluten-free diet.
                
A positive biopsy and serology confirm DH and should be taken as indirect evidence of small bowel damage. A biopsy of the small bowel is usually not needed for DH diagnosis. However, if clinical signs of gastrointestinal disease are evident on examination, further workup may be required.2 Whether or not intestinal damage is evident, a gluten-free diet should be implemented because the rash of DH is gluten sensitive.4
The sulfone dapsone can provide immediate relief of symptoms. For patients who cannot tolerate dapsone, sulfapyridine or sulfamethoxypyridazine may be used, although these medications are less effective than dapsone. A strict gluten-free diet is the only treatment for the underlying disease. Even with a gluten-free diet, medication therapy may need to be continued from a few months to 2 years.
                
DH can go into remission, which is defined as absence of skin lesions and symptoms of DH for more than 2 years while not taking sulfones or other treatments and not adhering to a gluten-free diet. Cohort studies showing DH remission provide support for reducing sulfone therapy and weaning from a gluten-free diet in patients with well-controlled DH.6