Periventricular heterotopia is a condition in which the nerve cells (neurons) do not migrate properly during the early development of the fetal brain from about the 6th week to the 24th week of pregnancy. Affected people typically develop recurrent seizures (epilepsy) beginning in mid-adolescence. Intelligence is generally normal; however, some affected people may have mild intellectual disability, including difficulty with reading and/or spelling. Less common signs and symptoms include microcephaly, developmental delay, recurrent infections, and blood vessel abnormalities. Some cases are caused by changes (mutations) in the FLNA gene and are inherited in an X-linked dominant manner. Others are caused by mutations in the ARFGEF2 gene and are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Rarely, periventricular heterotopia is associated with duplication of genetic material on chromosome 5. Treatment is generally focused on managing recurrent seizures with medications.
 The condition is first noticed when seizures appear, often during the teenage years. The nodules around the ventricles are then typically discovered when magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies are done. Patients usually have normal intelligence, although some have mild intellectual disability. Difficulty with reading and spelling (dyslexia) has been reported in some girls with periventricular heterotopia. Less commonly, individuals with periventricular heterotopia may have more severe brain malformations, small head size (microcephaly), developmental delays, recurrent infections, blood vessel abnormalities, or other problems. In the X-linked form of periventricular nodular heterotopia, affected patients are mostly females because in males the symptoms are too serious and they die before birth. The following clinical features have been reported: seizure disorder, mental problems, heart anomalies, stomach immobility, strabismus, short fingers and dyslexia. Periventricular heterotopia may also occur in association with other conditions such as Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (Ehlers-Danlos with periventricular heterotopia) which results in extremely flexible joints, skin that stretches easily, and fragile blood vessels. In the autosomal recessive form of periventricular heterotopia the disorder is severe and may include microcephaly, severe developmental delay, and seizures beginning in infancy. Most often, the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but do not show any signs or symptoms of this condition.
What are the recommended evaluations for patients diagnosed with periventricular nodular heterotopia? The following evaluations are recommended:[1823]  Imaging exams of the brain to establish the diagnosis  Evaluation by a neurologist  Evaluation by a doctor specialized in epilepsy if seizures are present  Psychiatric evaluation if necessary  Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the brain vessels, carotid arteries, and aorta because of the risk for stroke  Evaluation by a cardiologist and either echocardiogram or a heart magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) because of the risk for aortic aneurysm  Evaluation by a hematologist if findings suggest a bleeding diathesis.
 Treatment of epilepsy generally follows principles for a seizure disorder caused by a known structural brain abnormality; carbamezipine is most often used, because most patients have focal seizures. However, antiepileptic drugs may be selected based on side effects, tolerability, and efficacy. It is recommended that patients with the X-linked form of the disease have studies evaluating the carotid artery and an abdominal ultrasound because of the risk for aortic or carotid dissection or other vascular anomalies.[1823] Treatment also include surgery for removal of the lesion and more recently, laser ablation guided with magnetic resonance.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Ehlers-Danlos syndrome with periventricular heterotopia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of coagulation 90% Hernia 90% Pyloric stenosis 90% Scoliosis 90% Abnormality of the aortic valve 50% Cognitive impairment 50% Joint hypermobility 50% Morphological abnormality of the central nervous system 50% Patent ductus arteriosus 50% Seizures 50% Thin skin 50% Dilatation of the ascending aorta 7.5% Patellar dislocation 7.5% Shoulder dislocation 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Periventricular heterotopia is a condition in which nerve cells (neurons) do not migrate properly during the early development of the fetal brain, from about the 6th week to the 24th week of pregnancy. Heterotopia means "out of place." In normal brain development, neurons form in the periventricular region, located around fluid-filled cavities (ventricles) near the center of the brain. The neurons then migrate outward to form the exterior of the brain (cerebral cortex) in six onion-like layers. In periventricular heterotopia, some neurons fail to migrate to their proper position and form clumps around the ventricles.  Periventricular heterotopia usually becomes evident when seizures first appear, often during the teenage years. The nodules around the ventricles are then typically discovered when magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies are done. Affected individuals usually have normal intelligence, although some have mild intellectual disability. Difficulty with reading and spelling (dyslexia) has been reported in some people with periventricular heterotopia.  Less commonly, individuals with periventricular heterotopia may have more severe brain malformations, small head size (microcephaly), developmental delays, recurrent infections, blood vessel abnormalities, or other problems. Periventricular heterotopia may also occur in association with other conditions such as Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, which results in extremely flexible joints, skin that stretches easily, and fragile blood vessels.
Periventricular heterotopia is a rare condition. Its incidence is unknown.
Periventricular heterotopia is related to chromosome 5.  Mutations in the ARFGEF2 and FLNA genes cause periventricular heterotopia.  In most cases, periventricular heterotopia is caused by mutations in the FLNA gene. This gene provides instructions for producing the protein filamin A, which helps build the network of protein filaments (cytoskeleton) that gives structure to cells and allows them to change shape and move. Certain mutations in the FLNA gene result in an impaired FLNA protein that cannot perform this function, disrupting the normal migration patterns of neurons during brain development.  Periventricular heterotopia can also be caused by mutations in the ARFGEF2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is involved in the movement (trafficking) of small sac-like structures (vesicles) within the cell. Vesicle trafficking is important in controlling the migration of neurons during the development of the brain. Mutations in the ARFGEF2 gene may disrupt this function, which could result in the abnormal neuronal migration seen in periventricular heterotopia.  Researchers believe that mutations in the FLNA or ARFGEF2 genes may also result in weakening of the attachments (adhesion) between cells that form the lining of the ventricles. A weakened ventricular lining could allow some neurons to form clumps around the ventricles while others migrate normally to the exterior of the brain, as seen in periventricular heterotopia.  In a few cases, periventricular heterotopia has been associated with abnormalities in chromosome 5. In each case, the affected individual had extra genetic material caused by an abnormal duplication of part of this chromosome. It is not known how this duplicated genetic material results in the signs and symptoms of periventricular heterotopia.
Periventricular heterotopia can have different inheritance patterns. When this condition is caused by mutations in the FLNA gene, it is inherited in an X-linked dominant pattern.  A condition is considered X-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes. The inheritance is dominant if one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.  In X-linked periventricular heterotopia, males experience much more severe symptoms of the disorder than females, and in most cases die before birth.  In about 50 percent of cases of X-linked periventricular heterotopia, an affected person inherits the mutation from a mother who is also affected. Other cases may result from new mutations in the gene. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.  Periventricular heterotopia caused by mutations in the ARFGEF2 gene is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. Individuals with periventricular heterotopia in whom ARFGEF2 gene mutations have been identified have a severe form of the disorder, including microcephaly, severe developmental delay, and seizures beginning in infancy. Most often, the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of periventricular heterotopia:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: FLNA-Related Periventricular Nodular Heterotopia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Heterotopia, periventricular, associated with chromosome 5p anomalies  - Genetic Testing Registry: Heterotopia, periventricular, autosomal recessive  - Genetic Testing Registry: X-linked periventricular heterotopia   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care