 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hirschsprung disease type 3. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Aganglionic megacolon - Autosomal dominant inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Hirschsprung disease is an intestinal disorder characterized by the absence of nerves in parts of the intestine. This condition occurs when the nerves in the intestine (enteric nerves) do not form properly during development before birth (embryonic development). This condition is usually identified in the first two months of life, although less severe cases may be diagnosed later in childhood.  Enteric nerves trigger the muscle contractions that move stool through the intestine. Without these nerves in parts of the intestine, the material cannot be pushed through, causing severe constipation or complete blockage of the intestine in people with Hirschsprung disease. Other signs and symptoms of this condition include vomiting, abdominal pain or swelling, diarrhea, poor feeding, malnutrition, and slow growth. People with this disorder are at risk of developing more serious conditions such as inflammation of the intestine (enterocolitis) or a hole in the wall of the intestine (intestinal perforation), which can cause serious infection and may be fatal.  There are two main types of Hirschsprung disease, known as short-segment disease and long-segment disease, which are defined by the region of the intestine lacking nerve cells. In short-segment disease, nerve cells are missing from only the last segment of the large intestine. This type is most common, occurring in approximately 80 percent of people with Hirschsprung disease. For unknown reasons, short-segment disease is four times more common in men than in women. Long-segment disease occurs when nerve cells are missing from most of the large intestine and is the more severe type. Long-segment disease is found in approximately 20 percent of people with Hirschsprung disease and affects men and women equally. Very rarely, nerve cells are missing from the entire large intestine and sometimes part of the small intestine (total colonic aganglionosis) or from all of the large and small intestine (total intestinal aganglionosis).  Hirschsprung disease can occur in combination with other conditions, such as Waardenburg syndrome, type IV; Mowat-Wilson syndrome; or congenital central hypoventilation syndrome. These cases are described as syndromic. Hirschsprung disease can also occur without other conditions, and these cases are referred to as isolated or nonsyndromic.
Hirschsprung disease occurs in approximately 1 in 5,000 newborns.
Isolated Hirschsprung disease can result from mutations in one of several genes, including the RET, EDNRB, and EDN3 genes. However, the genetics of this condition appear complex and are not completely understood. While a mutation in a single gene sometimes causes the condition, mutations in multiple genes may be required in some cases. The genetic cause of the condition is unknown in approximately half of affected individuals.  Mutations in the RET gene are the most common known genetic cause of Hirschsprung disease. The RET gene provides instructions for producing a protein that is involved in signaling within cells. This protein appears to be essential for the normal development of several kinds of nerve cells, including nerves in the intestine. Mutations in the RET gene that cause Hirschsprung disease result in a nonfunctional version of the RET protein that cannot transmit signals within cells. Without RET protein signaling, enteric nerves do not develop properly. Absence of these nerves leads to the intestinal problems characteristic of Hirschsprung disease.  The EDNRB gene provides instructions for making a protein called endothelin receptor type B. When this protein interacts with other proteins called endothelins, it transmits information from outside the cell to inside the cell, signaling for many important cellular processes. The EDN3 gene provides instructions for a protein called endothelin 3, one of the endothelins that interacts with endothelin receptor type B. Together, endothelin 3 and endothelin receptor type B play an important role in the normal formation of enteric nerves. Changes in either the EDNRB gene or the EDN3 gene disrupt the normal functioning of the endothelin receptor type B or the endothelin 3 protein, preventing them from transmitting signals important for the development of enteric nerves. As a result, these nerves do not form normally during embryonic development. A lack of enteric nerves prevents stool from being moved through the intestine, leading to severe constipation and intestinal blockage.
Approximately 20 percent of cases of Hirschsprung disease occur in multiple members of the same family. The remainder of cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their families.  Hirschsprung disease appears to have a dominant pattern of inheritance, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell may be sufficient to cause the disorder. The inheritance is considered to have incomplete penetrance because not everyone who inherits the altered gene from a parent develops Hirschsprung disease.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Hirschsprung disease:  - Cedars-Sinai: Treating Hirschsprung's Disease (Colonic Aganglionosis)  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Hirschsprung Disease Overview  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hirschsprung disease 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hirschsprung disease 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hirschsprung disease 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hirschsprung disease 4  - North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition: Hirschsprung's Disease  - Seattle Children's: Hirschsprung's Disease: Symptoms and Diagnosis   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Hirschsprung* disease (HD) is a disease of the large intestine that causes severe constipation or intestinal obstruction. Constipation means stool moves through the intestines slower than usual. Bowel movements occur less often than normal and stools are difficult to pass. Some children with HD cant pass stool at all, which can result in the complete blockage of the intestines, a condition called intestinal obstruction. People with HD are born with it and are usually diagnosed when they are infants. Less severe cases are sometimes diagnosed when a child is older. An HD diagnosis in an adult is rare.
                
*See Pronunciation Guide for tips on how to say the words in bold type.
People with HD have constipation because they lack nerve cells in a part or all of the large intestine. The nerve cells signal muscles in the large intestine to push stool toward the anus. Without a signal to push stool along, stool will remain in the large intestine.
                
How severe HD is depends on how much of the large intestine is affected. Short-segment HD means only the last part of the large intestine lacks nerve cells. Long-segment HD means most or all of the large intestine, and sometimes the last part of the small intestine, lacks nerve cells.
                
In a person with HD, stool moves through the large intestine until it reaches the part lacking nerve cells. At that point, the stool moves slowly or stops, causing an intestinal obstruction.
The main symptoms of HD are constipation or intestinal obstruction, usually appearing shortly after birth. Constipation in infants and children is common and usually comes and goes, but if your child has had ongoing constipation since birth, HD may be the problem.
                
Symptoms in Newborns
                
Newborns with HD almost always fail to have their first bowel movement within 48 hours after birth. Other symptoms include
                
- green or brown vomit  - explosive stools after a doctor inserts a finger into the rectum  - swelling of the belly, also known as the abdomen  - lots of gas  - bloody diarrhea
                

                
Symptoms in Toddlers and Older Children
                
Symptoms of HD in toddlers and older children include
                
- not being able to pass stools without laxatives or enemas. A laxative is medicine that loosens stool and increases bowel movements. An enema is performed by flushing water, or sometimes a mild soap solution, into the anus using a special wash bottle.  - swelling of the abdomen.  - lots of gas.  - bloody diarrhea.  - slow growth or development.  - lack of energy because of a shortage of red blood cells, called anemia.
HD is diagnosed based on symptoms and test results.
                
A doctor will perform a physical exam and ask questions about your childs bowel movements. HD is much less likely if parents can identify a time when their childs bowel habits were normal.
                
If HD is suspected, the doctor will do one or more tests.
                
X rays
                
An x ray is a black-and-white picture of the inside of the body. To make the large intestine show up better, the doctor may fill it with barium liquid. Barium liquid is inserted into the large intestine through the anus.
                
If HD is the problem, the last segment of the large intestine will look narrower than normal. Just before this narrow segment, the intestine will look bulged. The bulging is caused by blocked stool stretching the intestine.
                
Manometry
                
During manometry, the doctor inflates a small balloon inside the rectum. Normally, the rectal muscles will relax. If the muscles dont relax, HD may be the problem. This test is most often done in older children and adults.
                
Biopsy
                
Biopsy is the most accurate test for HD. The doctor removes a tiny piece of the large intestine and looks at it with a microscope. If nerve cells are missing, HD is the problem.
Pull-through Procedure
                
HD is treated with surgery called a pull-through procedure. A surgeon removes the segment of the large intestine lacking nerve cells and connects the healthy segment to the anus. The pull-through procedure is usually done soon after diagnosis.
                
Ostomy surgery
                
An ostomy allows stool to leave the body through an opening in the abdomen. Although most children with HD do not need an ostomy, a child who has been very sick from HD may need an ostomy to get better before the pull-through procedure.
                
For ostomy surgery, the surgeon first takes out the diseased segment of the large intestine. The end of the healthy intestine is moved to an opening in the abdomen where a stoma is created. A stoma is created by rolling the intestines end back on itself, like a shirt cuff, and stitching it to the abdominal wall. An ostomy pouch is attached to the stoma and worn outside the body to collect stool. The pouch will need to be emptied several times each day.
                

                
If the surgeon removes the entire large intestine and connects the small intestine to the stoma, the surgery is called an ileostomy. If the surgeon leaves part of the large intestine and connects it to the stoma, the surgery is called a colostomy.
                
Later, during the pull-through procedure, the surgeon removes the stoma and closes the abdomen with stitches.
- Hirschsprung disease (HD) is a disease of the large intestine that causes severe constipation or intestinal obstruction. People with HD are born with it.  - The large intestine, which includes the colon and rectum, is the last part of the digestive tract.  - The cause of HD is unclear. HD is not caused by anything a mother did while pregnant.  - The main symptoms of HD are constipation or intestinal obstruction, usually appearing shortly after birth.  - Newborns with HD almost always fail to have their first bowel movement within 48 hours after birth.  - HD is diagnosed based on symptoms and test results.  - HD is treated with surgery called a pull-through procedure.  - A child who has been very sick from HD may need an ostomy to get better before the pull-through procedure.  - Most children pass stool normally after the pull-through procedure.  - People with HD can suffer from an infection of the intestines, called enterocolitis, before or after surgery.  - If you have a child with HD, your chance of having more children with HD is greater.