The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal blistering of the skin 90% Behavioral abnormality 90% Cheilitis 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Hearing impairment 90% Hypertrichosis 90% Inflammatory abnormality of the eye 90% Muscular hypotonia 90% Nausea and vomiting 90% Reduced consciousness/confusion 90% Seizures 90% Skin rash 90% Weight loss 90% Abnormal pattern of respiration 50% Hyperammonemia 50% Respiratory insufficiency 50% Alopecia 7.5% Dry skin 7.5% Incoordination 7.5% Thrombocytopenia 7.5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Coma - Feeding difficulties in infancy - Hypertonia - Hyperventilation - Irritability - Lethargy - Metabolic acidosis - Organic aciduria - Tachypnea - Vomiting - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency is an inherited disorder in which the body is unable to use the vitamin biotin effectively. This disorder is classified as a multiple carboxylase deficiency, a group of disorders characterized by impaired activity of certain enzymes that depend on biotin.  The signs and symptoms of holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency typically appear within the first few months of life, but the age of onset varies. Affected infants often have difficulty feeding, breathing problems, a skin rash, hair loss (alopecia), and a lack of energy (lethargy). Immediate treatment and lifelong management with biotin supplements may prevent many of these complications. If left untreated, the disorder can lead to delayed development, seizures, and coma. These medical problems may be life-threatening in some cases.
The exact incidence of this condition is unknown, but it is estimated to affect 1 in 87,000 people.
Mutations in the HLCS gene cause holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency.  The HLCS gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called holocarboxylase synthetase. This enzyme is important for the effective use of biotin, a B vitamin found in foods such as liver, egg yolks, and milk. Holocarboxylase synthetase attaches biotin to certain enzymes that are essential for the normal production and breakdown of proteins, fats, and carbohydrates in the body. Mutations in the HLCS gene reduce the enzyme's ability to attach biotin to these enzymes, preventing them from processing nutrients properly and disrupting many cellular functions. These defects lead to the serious medical problems associated with holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency:  - Baby's First Test  - Genetic Testing Registry: Holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Pantothenic Acid and Biotin   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care