Holt-Oram syndrome is a genetic condition characterized by skeletal abnormalities of the hands and arms (upper limbs) and heart problems. Affected people have at least one bone abnormality in the wrist, many of which can be detected only by X-ray. Additional skeletal abnormalities may also be present. About 75% of affected people have heart problems, including congenital heart defects and/or cardiac conduction disease (an abnormality in the electrical system that coordinates contractions of the heart chambers). Holt-Oram syndrome is caused by mutations in the TBX5 gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Most cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no family history of the condition.
 Holt-Oram syndrome is caused by changes (mutations) in the TBX5 gene. This gene gives the body instructions for making a protein involved in the development of the heart and upper limbs before birth. In particular, this gene seems important for dividing the developing heart into four chambers, and in regulating the development of bones in the arms and hands. When the TBX5 gene doesn't function properly, the features of Holt-Oram syndrome result. In some cases the mutation occurs for the first time in an affected person, while in other cases the mutation is inherited from a parent. However, in both of these cases, there is nothing a parent can do to cause this mutation or condition in a child.
How  Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that having only one changed (mutated) copy of the responsible gene in each cell is enough to cause signs and symptoms of the condition. In most cases, the mutation in the gene occurs for the first time in the affected person and is not inherited from a parent. When a mutation occurs for the first time, it is called a de novo mutation. This is what typically occurs when there is no family history of the condition. A de novo mutation is due to a random change in the DNA in an egg or sperm cell, or right after conception. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutated copy of the gene from an affected parent. In these cases, the symptoms and severity can differ from those of the affected parent.  When a person with an autosomal dominant condition has children, each child has a 50% (1 in 2) risk to inherit the condition.
 The diagnosis of Holt-Oram syndrome can be established based on physical features and family history. It can be confirmed through genetic testing looking for mutations in the TBX5 gene. Hand x-rays are usually performed for upper-limb malformations. A family history of this condition and/or cogenital heart malformations is also used as a diagnostic tool as a congenital heart malformation is present in 75% of individuals with Holt-Oram syndrome. An echocardiogram and electrocardiogram can be used to determine the presence and severity of heart defects and/or cardiac conduction disease. Holt-Oram syndrome can be excluded in individuals with congenital malformations involving the following structures or organ systems: ulnar ray only, kidney, vertebra, head and face region, auditory system (hearing loss or ear malformations), lower limb, anus, or eye.
 The treatment of Holt-Oram syndrome is directed toward the specific symptoms that are apparent in each individual. Treatment may require the coordinated efforts of a team of specialists such as pediatricians, surgeons, cardiologists, orthopedists, and/or other health care professionals. Depending upon the severity of any upper limb abnormalities, treatment may consist of corrective or reconstructive surgery, the use of artificial replacements for portions of the forearms and hands (limb prosthetics), and/or physical therapy to help individuals enhance their motor skills. In those with mild cardiac conduction abnormalities, treatment may not be required. In more severe cases, an artificial pacemaker may be used. An artificial pacemaker overrides the heart's impaired electrical conducting system by sending electrical impulses to the heart that keep the heartbeat at a regular rate. Heart abnormalities may also be treated with certain medications, surgery, and/or other techniques. In such cases, the surgical procedures performed will depend upon the location and severity of the abnormalities and their associated symptoms. Affected individuals with heart defects may also be at risk for bacterial infection and inflammation of the lining of the heart's chambers and valves (endocarditis). So antibiotics should be prescribed before any surgical procedure, including dental procedures such as tooth extractions. In addition, because some individuals with certain heart defects may be susceptible to repeated respiratory infections, physicians may closely monitor such individuals to take preventive steps and to institute antibiotic and/or other appropriate therapies should such infections occur. Early intervention is important to ensure that children with Holt-Oram syndrome reach their potential. Special services that may be beneficial to affected children may include physical therapy and/or other medical, social, and/or vocational services.
Holt-Oram syndrome is estimated to affect 1 in 100,000 individuals.
Mutations in the TBX5 gene cause Holt-Oram syndrome. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that plays a role in the development of the heart and upper limbs before birth. In particular, this gene appears to be important for the process that divides the developing heart into four chambers (cardiac septation). The TBX5 gene also appears to play a critical role in regulating the development of bones in the arm and hand. Mutations in this gene probably disrupt the development of the heart and upper limbs, leading to the characteristic features of Holt-Oram syndrome.