Molar pregnancy is a condition in which the placenta does not develop properly. The symptoms of molar pregnancy, which may include vaginal bleeding, severe morning sickness, stomach cramps, and high blood pressure, typically begin around the 10th week of pregnancy. Because the embryo does not form or is malformed in molar pregnancies, and because there is a small risk of developing a cancer called choriocarcinoma, a D&C is usually performed.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hydatidiform mole. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the menstrual cycle 90% Anemia 90% Nausea and vomiting 90% Spontaneous abortion 90% Toxemia of pregnancy 90% Hyperthyroidism 7.5% Abnormality of the genitourinary system - Autosomal recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Recurrent hydatidiform mole. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the genitourinary system - Autosomal recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Recurrent hydatidiform mole occurs when women have at least two abnormal pregnancies described as hydatidiform moles. A hydatidiform mole occurs early in pregnancy when an embryo does not fully develop and the placenta develops abnormally. The placenta is a solid structure in the uterus that normally provides nutrients to a growing fetus. If a hydatidiform mole occurs once, it is known a sporadic hydatidiform mole; if it happens again, the condition is known as recurrent hydatidiform mole.  A hydatidiform mole often causes vaginal bleeding in the first trimester of the pregnancy. In an ultrasound examination, the abnormal placenta appears as numerous small sacs, often described as resembling a bunch of grapes. In some cases, the ultrasound shows no fetus, umbilical cord, or amniotic sac (a fluid-filled sac that normally surrounds the fetus).  Hydatidiform moles are not naturally discharged from the body and must be surgically removed, typically by the end of the first trimester. After removal, there is up to a 20 percent risk that any tissue left behind (persistent mole) will continue to grow and become a cancerous tumor called an invasive mole. The invasive mole can transform into a different form of cancer called gestational choriocarcinoma that can spread (metastasize) to other tissues such as the liver, lungs, or brain.
Hydatidiform moles occur in 1 in 600 to 1,000 pregnancies in western countries and are more common in developing countries. One to six percent of previously affected women will have a recurrent hydatidiform mole.
This condition is often inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means a woman has to have mutations in both copies of the gene in each of her cells to have recurrent hydatidiform mole pregnancies. Because the mutations are present in all of a woman's cells, including oocytes (which need these genes to promote normal embryonic development), a hydatidiform mole will develop in each pregnancy that occurs with those egg cells.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of recurrent hydatidiform mole:  - American Cancer Society: Signs and Symptoms of Gestational Trophoblastic Disease  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hydatidiform mole  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hydatidiform mole, recurrent, 2  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Choriocarcinoma  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hydatidiform Mole   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care