17-beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 3 deficiencyis an inherited condition that affects male sexual development. People with this condition are genetically male and have testes, but do not produce enough testosterone. Most people with this condition are born with external genitalia that appear female. In some cases, the external genitalia are ambiguous or appear male but are abnormal in size and/or appearance. During puberty, people with this condition typically go on to develop male secondary sex characteristics, such as increased muscle mass, deepening of the voice, and development of male pattern body hair. 17-beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 3 deficiency is caused by mutations in the HSD17B3 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for 17-beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 3 deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the urethra 90% Cryptorchidism 90% Decreased fertility 90% Gynecomastia 90% Male pseudohermaphroditism 90% Hypothyroidism 7.5% Abnormality of metabolism/homeostasis - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Infertility - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
17-beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 3 deficiency is a rare disorder. Researchers have estimated that this condition occurs in approximately 1 in 147,000 newborns. It is more common in the Arab population of Gaza, where it affects 1 in 200 to 300 people.
Mutations in the HSD17B3 gene cause 17-beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 3 deficiency. The HSD17B3 gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called 17-beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 3. This enzyme is active in the testes, where it helps to produce testosterone from a precursor hormone called androstenedione.  Mutations in the HSD17B3 gene result in a 17-beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 3 enzyme with little or no activity, reducing testosterone production. A shortage of testosterone affects the development of the reproductive tract in the male fetus, resulting in the abnormalities in the external sex organs that occur in 17-beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 3 deficiency.  At puberty, conversion of androstenedione to testosterone increases in various tissues of the body through processes involving other enzymes. The additional testosterone results in the development of male secondary sex characteristics in adolescents, including those with 17-beta dehydrogenase 3 deficiency.  A portion of the androstenedione is also converted to the female sex hormone estrogen. Since impairment of the conversion to testosterone in this disorder results in excess androstenedione in the body, a corresponding excess of estrogen may be produced, leading to breast enlargement in some affected individuals.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Individuals who are genetically male and have two copies of a mutated gene in each cell are affected by 17-beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 3 deficiency. People with two mutations who are genetically female do not usually experience any signs and symptoms of this disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of 17-beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 3 deficiency:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Testosterone 17-beta-dehydrogenase deficiency  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Ambiguous Genitalia  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Intersex   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care