The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hypercholesterolemia, autosomal dominant. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Corneal arcus - Coronary artery disease - Hypercholesterolemia - Xanthelasma - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Familial hypercholesterolemia is a condition characterized by very high levels of cholesterol in the blood due to mutations in the LDLR gene. People with hypercholesterolemia have a high risk of developing a form of heart disease called coronary artery disease, as well as health problems related to the buildup of excess cholesterol in other tissues (e.g., in the tendons and skin). Familial hypercholesterolemia tends to be passed through families in an autosomal dominant fashion. There are other hereditary forms of hypercholesterolemia caused by mutations in the APOB, LDLRAP1, or PCSK9 gene. However, most cases of high cholesterol are not caused by a single inherited condition, but result from a combination of lifestyle choices and the effects of variations in many genes.
 Signs and symptoms in individuals with the autosomal dominant form of familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), also called the heterozygous form, may include: Men who have FH may have heart attacks in their 40s to 50s, and 85% of men with the disorder have a heart attack by age 60. Affected women may have heart attacks in their 50s and 60s. Individuals with the rare, autosomal recessive form of FH (also called homozygous FH) develop xanthomas beneath the skin over their elbows, knees and buttocks as well as in the tendons at a very early age, sometime in infancy. In individuals with this form of FH, heart attacks and/or death may occur before age 30, sometimes in young children if they are not aggressively treated. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Familial hypercholesterolemia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Corneal arcus - Hypercholesterolemia - Xanthelasma - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
How  Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is usually inherited in an autosomal dominant manner (in which case it is referred to as heterozygous FH). Individuals inherit two copies of each gene (one from each parent). In an autosomal dominant condition, having only one abnormal (mutated) copy of the gene is sufficient to cause the condition. In most cases the mutated gene is inherited from an affected parent, but it is possible for the mutation to occur for the first time in the affected individual. An individual with an autosomal dominant condition has a 50% (1 in 2) chance to pass the mutation on to each of his/her children and a 50% chance to not pass on the mutation. More rarely, familial FH may be inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This occurs when an individual inherits a mutated copy of the gene from both parents (this is also called homozygous FH). This is a much more severe form of FH. An individual with this form of FH will always pass on a mutated copy of the gene, and therefore each of his/her children will have heterozygous FH.
 The overall goal of treatment for familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is to lower the risk for atherosclerosis (build-up of plaque in the arteries) by lowering the LDL cholesterol levels in the blood stream. The first step in treatment for individuals with the heterozygous form (also called the autosomal dominant form) is changing the diet to reduce the total amount of fat eaten. This may be accomplished by limiting the amount of beef, pork, and lamb in the diet; cutting out butter, whole milk, fatty cheeses and oils; and eliminating egg yolks, organ meats and other sources of saturated fat from animals. Dietary counseling is often recommended to help individuals change their eating habits. Exercise and weight loss may also help in lowering cholesterol levels. Drug therapy is also often necessary lifestyle changes may not be enough to lower cholesterol levels. Several different cholesterol-lowering medications may be used alone or in combination; they may include statins, bile acid sequestrants, ezetemibe, niacin, gemfibrozil, and fenofibrate. Individuals with the more severe, homozygous form of FH (also called the autosomal recessive form) need more aggressive therapies to treat their significantly elevated levels of cholesterol. Drug therapy is often not effective enough at lowering LDL cholesterol levels. Therefore, individuals with this form may need periodical LDL apheresis, a procedure that removes LDL from the blood. In some cases, major surgery such as a liver transplant is necessary.
Hypercholesterolemia is a condition characterized by very high levels of cholesterol in the blood. Cholesterol is a waxy, fat-like substance that is produced in the body and obtained from foods that come from animals (particularly egg yolks, meat, poultry, fish, and dairy products). The body needs this substance to build cell membranes, make certain hormones, and produce compounds that aid in fat digestion. Too much cholesterol, however, increases a person's risk of developing heart disease.  People with hypercholesterolemia have a high risk of developing a form of heart disease called coronary artery disease. This condition occurs when excess cholesterol in the bloodstream is deposited in the walls of blood vessels, particularly in the arteries that supply blood to the heart (coronary arteries). The abnormal buildup of cholesterol forms clumps (plaque) that narrow and harden artery walls. As the clumps get bigger, they can clog the arteries and restrict the flow of blood to the heart. The buildup of plaque in coronary arteries causes a form of chest pain called angina and greatly increases a person's risk of having a heart attack.  Inherited forms of hypercholesterolemia can also cause health problems related to the buildup of excess cholesterol in other tissues. If cholesterol accumulates in tendons, it causes characteristic growths called tendon xanthomas. These growths most often affect the Achilles tendons and tendons in the hands and fingers. Yellowish cholesterol deposits under the skin of the eyelids are known as xanthelasmata. Cholesterol can also accumulate at the edges of the clear, front surface of the eye (the cornea), leading to a gray-colored ring called an arcus cornealis.
More than 34 million American adults have elevated blood cholesterol levels (higher than 240 mg/dL). Inherited forms of hypercholesterolemia, which cause even higher levels of cholesterol, occur less frequently. The most common inherited form of high cholesterol is called familial hypercholesterolemia. This condition affects about 1 in 500 people in most countries. Familial hypercholesterolemia occurs more frequently in certain populations, including Afrikaners in South Africa, French Canadians, Lebanese, and Finns.
Mutations in the APOB, LDLR, LDLRAP1, and PCSK9 genes cause hypercholesterolemia.  High blood cholesterol levels typically result from a combination of genetic and environmental risk factors. Lifestyle choices including diet, exercise, and tobacco smoking strongly influence the amount of cholesterol in the blood. Additional factors that impact cholesterol levels include a person's gender, age, and health problems such as diabetes and obesity. A small percentage of all people with high cholesterol have an inherited form of hypercholesterolemia. The most common cause of inherited high cholesterol is a condition known as familial hypercholesterolemia, which results from mutations in the LDLR gene.  The LDLR gene provides instructions for making a protein called a low-density lipoprotein receptor. This type of receptor binds to particles called low-density lipoproteins (LDLs), which are the primary carriers of cholesterol in the blood. By removing low-density lipoproteins from the bloodstream, these receptors play a critical role in regulating cholesterol levels. Some LDLR mutations reduce the number of low-density lipoprotein receptors produced within cells. Other mutations disrupt the receptors' ability to remove low-density lipoproteins from the bloodstream. As a result, people with mutations in the LDLR gene have very high levels of blood cholesterol. As the excess cholesterol circulates through the bloodstream, it is deposited abnormally in tissues such as the skin, tendons, and arteries that supply blood to the heart.  Less commonly, hypercholesterolemia can be caused by mutations in the APOB, LDLRAP1, or PCSK9 gene. Changes in the APOB gene result in a form of inherited hypercholesterolemia known as familial defective apolipoprotein B-100 (FDB). LDLRAP1 mutations are responsible for another type of inherited high cholesterol, autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia (ARH). Proteins produced from the APOB, LDLRAP1, and PCSK9 genes are essential for the normal function of low-density lipoprotein receptors. Mutations in any of these genes prevent the cell from making functional receptors or alter the receptors' function. Hypercholesterolemia results when low-density lipoprotein receptors are unable to remove cholesterol from the blood effectively.  Researchers are working to identify and characterize additional genes that may influence cholesterol levels and the risk of heart disease in people with hypercholesterolemia.
Most cases of high cholesterol are not caused by a single inherited condition, but result from a combination of lifestyle choices and the effects of variations in many genes.  Inherited forms of hypercholesterolemia resulting from mutations in the LDLR, APOB, or PCSK9 gene have an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. Autosomal dominant inheritance means one copy of an altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. An affected person typically inherits one altered copy of the gene from an affected parent and one normal copy of the gene from the other parent.  Rarely, a person with familial hypercholesterolemia is born with two mutated copies of the LDLR gene. This situation occurs when the person has two affected parents, each of whom passes on one altered copy of the gene. The presence of two LDLR mutations results in a more severe form of hypercholesterolemia that usually appears in childhood.  When hypercholesterolemia is caused by mutations in the LDLRAP1 gene, the condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Autosomal recessive inheritance means the condition results from two altered copies of the gene in each cell. The parents of an individual with autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia each carry one copy of the altered gene, but their blood cholesterol levels are usually in the normal range.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of hypercholesterolemia:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Familial Hypercholesterolemia  - GeneFacts: Familial Hypercholesterolemia: Diagnosis  - GeneFacts: Familial Hypercholesterolemia: Management  - Genetic Testing Registry: Familial hypercholesterolemia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hypercholesterolemia, autosomal dominant, 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hypercholesterolemia, autosomal dominant, type B  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hypercholesterolemia, autosomal recessive  - Genomics Education Programme (UK)  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Familial hypercholesterolemia  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: High blood cholesterol and triglycerides  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Xanthoma   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care