Primary hyperoxaluria type 2  is a rare condition characterized by the overproduction of a substance called oxalate (also called oxalic acid). In the kidneys, the excess oxalate combines with calcium to form calcium oxalate, a hard compound that is the main component of kidney stones. Deposits of calcium oxalate can lead to kidney damage, kidney failure, and injury to other organs. Primary hyperoxaluria type 2 is caused by the shortage (deficiency) of an enzyme called glyoxylate reductase/hydroxypyruvate reductase (GRHPR) that normally prevents the buildup of oxalate. This enzyme shortage is caused by mutations in the GRHPR gene. Primary hyperoxaluria type 2 is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
 Primary hyperoxaluria type 2 is characterized by recurrent nephrolithiasis (deposition of calcium oxalate in the kidney and urinary tract), nephrocalcinosis (deposition of calcium oxalate in the kidney tissue), and end-stage renal disease (ESRD). After ESRD, oxalosis (widespread tissue deposition of calcium oxalate) usually develops. Presenting symptoms are typically those associated with the presence of kidney stones, including hematuria, renal colic (a type of abdominal pain caused by kidney stones), or obstruction of the urinary tract. The symptoms of primary hyperoxaluria type 2 are typically less severe than primary hyperoxaluria type 1 and may be limited to kidney stone formation. Symptom onset may occur in childhood or adolescence. End stage renal disease is rarely observed in childhood. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Primary hyperoxaluria type 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Renal insufficiency 5% Aminoaciduria - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Calcium oxalate nephrolithiasis - Hematuria - Hyperoxaluria - Nephrocalcinosis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Researchers have identified more than a dozen GRHPR mutations that cause this condition. These mutations either introduce signals that disrupt production of the glyoxylate reductase/hydroxypyruvate reductase enzyme or alter its structure. As a result, enzyme activity is absent or dramatically reduced. Glyoxylate builds up because of the enzyme shortage, and is converted to a compound called oxalate instead of glycolate. Oxalate, in turn, combines with calcium to form calcium oxalate, which the body cannot readily eliminate. Deposits of calcium oxalate can lead to the characteristic features of primary hyperoxaluria type 2.
How  Primary hyperoxaluria type 2 is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
 The current management strategy includes high fluid intake, treatment with inhibitors of calcium oxalate crystallization, and temporary intensive dialysis for end-stage renal disease (ESRD) followed by kidney transplantation. Varying success has been reported following transplantation, with recurrence being a real possibility since hyperoxaluria and elevated L-glycerate levels persist. Careful management in the postoperative period, with attention to brisk urine output and use of calcium oxalate urinary inhibitors may help prevent complications. To date, liver-kidney transplantation has not been used in primary hyperoxaluria type 2. This strategy may be considered, however, as there is more enzyme in the liver than in other tissues. More studies are needed before liver transplantation can be recommended. Other treatment modalities needing further investigation include liver cell transplantation and recombinant gene therapy to replace the missing enzyme.
Primary hyperoxaluria is a rare condition characterized by recurrent kidney and bladder stones. The condition often results in end stage renal disease (ESRD), which is a life-threatening condition that prevents the kidneys from filtering fluids and waste products from the body effectively.  Primary hyperoxaluria results from the overproduction of a substance called oxalate. Oxalate is filtered through the kidneys and excreted as a waste product in urine, leading to abnormally high levels of this substance in urine (hyperoxaluria). During its excretion, oxalate can combine with calcium to form calcium oxalate, a hard compound that is the main component of kidney and bladder stones. Deposits of calcium oxalate can damage the kidneys and other organs and lead to blood in the urine (hematuria), urinary tract infections, kidney damage, ESRD, and injury to other organs. Over time, kidney function decreases such that the kidneys can no longer excrete as much oxalate as they receive. As a result oxalate levels in the blood rise, and the substance gets deposited in tissues throughout the body (systemic oxalosis), particularly in bones and the walls of blood vessels. Oxalosis in bones can cause fractures.  There are three types of primary hyperoxaluria that differ in their severity and genetic cause. In primary hyperoxaluria type 1, kidney stones typically begin to appear anytime from childhood to early adulthood, and ESRD can develop at any age. Primary hyperoxaluria type 2 is similar to type 1, but ESRD develops later in life. In primary hyperoxaluria type 3, affected individuals often develop kidney stones in early childhood, but few cases of this type have been described so additional signs and symptoms of this type are unclear.
Primary hyperoxaluria is estimated to affect 1 in 58,000 individuals worldwide. Type 1 is the most common form, accounting for approximately 80 percent of cases. Types 2 and 3 each account for about 10 percent of cases.
Mutations in the AGXT, GRHPR, and HOGA1 genes cause primary hyperoxaluria types 1, 2, and 3, respectively. These genes provide instructions for making enzymes that are involved in the breakdown and processing of protein building blocks (amino acids) and other compounds. The enzyme produced from the HOGA1 gene is involved in the breakdown of an amino acid, which results in the formation of a compound called glyoxylate. This compound is further broken down by the enzymes produced from the AGXT and GRHPR genes.  Mutations in the AGXT, GRHPR, or HOGA1 gene lead to a decrease in production or activity of the respective proteins, which prevents the normal breakdown of glyoxylate. AGXT and GRHPR gene mutations result in an accumulation of glyoxylate, which is then converted to oxalate for removal from the body as a waste product. HOGA1 gene mutations also result in excess oxalate, although researchers are unsure as to how this occurs. Oxalate that is not excreted from the body combines with calcium to form calcium oxalate deposits, which can damage the kidneys and other organs.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of primary hyperoxaluria:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Primary Hyperoxaluria Type 1  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Primary Hyperoxaluria Type 2  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Primary Hyperoxaluria Type 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hyperoxaluria  - Genetic Testing Registry: Primary hyperoxaluria   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care