Your thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in your neck, just above your collarbone. It is one of your endocrine glands, which make hormones. Thyroid hormones control the rate of many activities in your body. These include how fast you burn calories and how fast your heart beats. All of these activities are your body's metabolism. If your thyroid is too active, it makes more thyroid hormones than your body needs. This is called hyperthyroidism.    Hyperthyroidism is more common in women, people with other thyroid problems, and those over 60 years old. Grave's disease, an autoimmune disorder, is the most common cause. Other causes include thyroid nodules, thyroiditis, consuming too much iodine, and taking too much synthetic thyroid hormone.    The symptoms can vary from person to person. They may include       - Being nervous or irritable    - Mood swings    - Fatigue or muscle weakness    - Heat intolerance    - Trouble sleeping    - Hand tremors    - Rapid and irregular heartbeat    - Frequent bowel movements or diarrhea    - Weight loss    - Goiter, which is an enlarged thyroid that may cause the neck to look swollen       To diagnose hyperthyroidism, your doctor will look at your symptoms, blood tests, and sometimes a thyroid scan. Treatment is with medicines, radioiodine therapy, or thyroid surgery. No single treatment works for everyone.    NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
Hyperthyroidism has many symptoms that can vary from person to person. Some common symptoms of hyperthyroidism are
                
- nervousness or irritability  - fatigue or muscle weakness  - heat intolerance  - trouble sleeping  - hand tremors  - rapid and irregular heartbeat  - frequent bowel movements or diarrhea  - weight loss  - mood swings  - goiter, which is an enlarged thyroid that may cause the neck to look swollen and can interfere with normal breathing and swallowing
Many symptoms of hyperthyroidism are the same as those of other diseases, so hyperthyroidism usually cannot be diagnosed based on symptoms alone. With suspected hyperthyroidism, health care providers take a medical history and perform a thorough physical exam. Health care providers may then use several blood tests, such as the following, to confirm a diagnosis of hyperthyroidism and find its cause:
                
TSH test. The ultrasensitive TSH test is usually the first test a health care provider performs. This test detects even tiny amounts of TSH in the blood and is the most accurate measure of thyroid activity available. The TSH test is especially useful in detecting mild hyperthyroidism. Generally, a TSH reading below normal means a person has hyperthyroidism and a reading above normal means a person has hypothyroidism.
                
Health care providers may conduct additional tests to help confirm the diagnosis or determine the cause of hyperthyroidism.
                
T3 and T4 test. This test shows the levels of T3 and T4 in the blood. With hyperthyroidism, the levels of one or both of these hormones in the blood are higher than normal.
                
Thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin (TSI) test. This test, also called a thyroidstimulating antibody test, measures the level of TSI in the blood. Most people with Graves disease have this antibody, but people whose hyperthyroidism is caused by other conditions do not.
                
Radioactive iodine uptake test. The radioactive iodine uptake test measures the amount of iodine the thyroid collects from the bloodstream. Measuring the amount of iodine in a persons thyroid helps the health care provider determine what is causing a persons hyperthyroidism. For example, low levels of iodine uptake might be a sign of thyroiditis, whereas high levels could indicate Graves disease.
                
Thyroid scan. A thyroid scan shows how and where iodine is distributed in the thyroid. The images of nodules and other possible irregularities help the health care provider diagnose the cause of a persons hyperthyroidism.
                
More information is provided in the NIDDK health topic, Thyroid Tests.
Experts recommend that people eat a balanced diet to obtain most nutrients. More information about diet and nutrition is provided by the National Agricultural Library at www.nutrition.gov.
                
Dietary Supplements
                
Iodine is an essential mineral for the thyroid. However, people with autoimmune thyroid disease may be sensitive to harmful side effects from iodine. Taking iodine drops or eating foods containing large amounts of iodinesuch as seaweed, dulse, or kelpmay cause or worsen hyperthyroidism. More information about iodine is provided by the National Library of Medicine in the fact sheet, Iodine in diet, available at www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus.
                
Women need more iodine when they are pregnantabout 250 micrograms a daybecause the baby gets iodine from the mothers diet. In the United States, about 7 percent of pregnant women may not get enough iodine in their diet or through prenatal vitamins.6 Choosing iodized saltsalt supplemented with iodineover plain salt and prenatal vitamins containing iodine will ensure this need is met.
                
To help ensure coordinated and safe care, people should discuss their use of dietary supplements, such as iodine, with their health care provider. Tips for talking with health care providers are available through the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health.