The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 3. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Alcohol-induced rhabdomyolysis - Anesthetic-induced rhabdomylosis - Elevated serum creatine phosphokinase - Exercise-induced rhabdomyolysis - Fever - Heterogeneous - Hyperkalemia - Hyperphosphatemia - Hypertonia - Lactic acidosis - Malignant hyperthermia - Myopathy - Viral infection-induced rhabdomyolysis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Malignant hyperthermia arthrogryposis torticollis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Camptodactyly of finger 90% Congenital muscular torticollis 90% Facial asymmetry 90% Limitation of joint mobility 90% Long philtrum 90% Low-set, posteriorly rotated ears 90% Plagiocephaly 90% Prominent metopic ridge 90% Scoliosis 90% Skeletal muscle atrophy 90% Talipes 90% Tapered finger 90% Ulnar deviation of finger 90% Webbed neck 90% Abnormality of the nipple 50% Abnormality of the voice 50% Amniotic constriction ring 50% Arachnodactyly 50% Cleft palate 50% Conductive hearing impairment 50% Cryptorchidism 50% Downturned corners of mouth 50% Malignant hyperthermia 50% Mask-like facies 50% Narrow mouth 50% Pectus excavatum 50% Prominent nasal bridge 50% Ptosis 50% Scrotal hypoplasia 50% Short stature 50% Abnormality of the fingernails 7.5% Abnormality of the ribs 7.5% Abnormality of the skin 7.5% Advanced eruption of teeth 7.5% Asymmetric growth 7.5% Broad alveolar ridges 7.5% Dolichocephaly 7.5% Exaggerated cupid's bow 7.5% Finger syndactyly 7.5% Full cheeks 7.5% Hernia of the abdominal wall 7.5% Hypotelorism 7.5% Kyphosis 7.5% Malar flattening 7.5% Muscular hypotonia 7.5% Polyhydramnios 7.5% Prenatal movement abnormality 7.5% Proptosis 7.5% Respiratory insufficiency 7.5% Sloping forehead 7.5% Abnormality of the mandible - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Natal tooth - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Malignant hyperthermia is a severe reaction to particular drugs that are often used during surgery and other invasive procedures. Specifically, this reaction occurs in response to some anesthetic gases, which are used to block the sensation of pain, and with a muscle relaxant that is used to temporarily paralyze a person during a surgical procedure. If given these drugs, people at risk for malignant hyperthermia may experience muscle rigidity, breakdown of muscle fibers (rhabdomyolysis), a high fever, increased acid levels in the blood and other tissues (acidosis), and a rapid heart rate. Without prompt treatment, the complications of malignant hyperthermia can be life-threatening.  People at increased risk for this disorder are said to have malignant hyperthermia susceptibility. Affected individuals may never know they have the condition unless they undergo testing or have a severe reaction to anesthesia during a surgical procedure. While this condition often occurs in people without other serious medical problems, certain inherited muscle diseases (including central core disease and multiminicore disease) are associated with malignant hyperthermia susceptibility.
Malignant hyperthermia occurs in 1 in 5,000 to 50,000 instances in which people are given anesthetic gases. Susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia is probably more frequent, because many people with an increased risk of this condition are never exposed to drugs that trigger a reaction.
Variations of the CACNA1S and RYR1 genes increase the risk of developing malignant hyperthermia.  Researchers have described at least six forms of malignant hyperthermia susceptibility, which are caused by mutations in different genes. Mutations in the RYR1 gene are responsible for a form of the condition known as MHS1. These mutations account for most cases of malignant hyperthermia susceptibility. Another form of the condition, MHS5, results from mutations in the CACNA1S gene. These mutations are less common, causing less than 1 percent of all cases of malignant hyperthermia susceptibility.  The RYR1 and CACNA1S genes provide instructions for making proteins that play essential roles in muscles used for movement (skeletal muscles). For the body to move normally, these muscles must tense (contract) and relax in a coordinated way. Muscle contractions are triggered by the flow of certain charged atoms (ions) into muscle cells. The proteins produced from the RYR1 and CACNA1S genes are involved in the movement of calcium ions within muscle cells. In response to certain signals, the CACNA1S protein helps activate the RYR1 channel, which releases stored calcium ions within muscle cells. The resulting increase in calcium ion concentration inside muscle cells stimulates muscle fibers to contract.  Mutations in the RYR1 or CACNA1S gene cause the RYR1 channel to open more easily and close more slowly in response to certain drugs. As a result, large amounts of calcium ions are released from storage within muscle cells. An overabundance of available calcium ions causes skeletal muscles to contract abnormally, which leads to muscle rigidity in people with malignant hyperthermia. An increase in calcium ion concentration within muscle cells also activates processes that generate heat (leading to increased body temperature) and produce excess acid (leading to acidosis).  The genetic causes of several other types of malignant hyperthermia (MHS2, MHS4, and MHS6) are still under study. A form of the condition known as MHS3 has been linked to the CACNA2D1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that plays an essential role in activating the RYR1 channel to release calcium ions into muscle cells. Although this gene is thought to be related to malignant hyperthermia in a few families, no causative mutations have been identified.
Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to increase the risk of a severe reaction to certain drugs used during surgery. In most cases, an affected person inherits the altered gene from a parent who is also at risk for the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of malignant hyperthermia:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility  - Genetic Testing Registry: Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 4  - Genetic Testing Registry: Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 5  - Genetic Testing Registry: Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 6  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Malignant Hyperthermia   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care