Autosomal dominant hyper-IgE syndrome (AD-HIES), also known as Job syndrome, is a condition that affects several body systems, particularly the immune system. Recurrent infections are common in people with this condition. Affected individuals tend to have frequent bouts of pneumonia, which are caused by certain kinds of bacteria that infect the lungs and cause inflammation. These infections often result in the formation of air-filled cysts (pneumatoceles) in the lungs. Recurrent skin infections and an inflammatory skin disorder called eczema are also very common in AD-HIES. These skin problems cause rashes, blisters, accumulations of pus (abscesses), open sores, and scaling.  AD-HIES is characterized by abnormally high levels of an immune system protein called immunoglobulin E (IgE) in the blood. IgE normally triggers an immune response against foreign invaders in the body, particularly parasitic worms, and plays a role in allergies. It is unclear why people with AD-HIES have such high levels of IgE.  AD-HIES also affects other parts of the body, including the bones and teeth. Many people with AD-HIES have skeletal abnormalities such as an unusually large range of joint movement (hyperextensibility), an abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis), reduced bone density (osteopenia), and a tendency for bones to fracture easily. Dental abnormalities are also common in this condition. The primary (baby) teeth do not fall out at the usual time during childhood but are retained as the adult teeth grow in. Other signs and symptoms of AD-HIES can include abnormalities of the arteries that supply blood to the heart muscle (coronary arteries), distinctive facial features, and structural abnormalities of the brain, which do not affect a person's intelligence.
This condition is rare, affecting fewer than 1 per million people.
Mutations in the STAT3 gene cause most cases of AD-HIES. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that plays an important role in several body systems. To carry out its roles, the STAT3 protein attaches to DNA and helps control the activity of particular genes. In the immune system, the STAT3 protein regulates genes that are involved in the maturation of immune system cells, especially T cells. These cells help control the body's response to foreign invaders such as bacteria and fungi.  Changes in the STAT3 gene alter the structure and function of the STAT3 protein, impairing its ability to control the activity of other genes. A shortage of functional STAT3 blocks the maturation of T cells (specifically a subset known as Th17 cells) and other immune cells. The resulting immune system abnormalities make people with AD-HIES highly susceptible to infections, particularly bacterial and fungal infections of the lungs and skin. The STAT3 protein is also involved in the formation of cells that build and break down bone tissue, which could help explain why STAT3 gene mutations lead to the skeletal and dental abnormalities characteristic of this condition. It is unclear how STAT3 gene mutations lead to increased IgE levels.  When AD-HIES is not caused by STAT3 gene mutations, the genetic cause of the condition is unknown.
AD-HIES has an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, which means one copy of an altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In about half of all cases caused by STAT3 gene mutations, an affected person inherits the genetic change from an affected parent. Other cases result from new mutations in this gene. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of autosomal dominant hyper-IgE syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Autosomal Dominant Hyper IgE Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hyperimmunoglobulin E syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hyperimmunoglobulin E syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Autosomal recessive hyper-IgE syndrome (AR-HIES) is a disorder of the immune system. A hallmark feature of the condition is recurrent infections that are severe and can be life-threatening. Skin infections can be caused by bacteria, viruses, or fungi. These infections cause rashes, blisters, accumulations of pus (abscesses), open sores, and scaling. People with AR-HIES also tend to have frequent bouts of pneumonia and other respiratory tract infections.  Other immune system-related problems in people with AR-HIES include an inflammatory skin disorder called eczema, food or environmental allergies, and asthma. In some affected individuals, the immune system malfunctions and attacks the body's own tissues and organs, causing autoimmune disease. For example, autoimmunity can lead to abnormal destruction of red blood cells (hemolytic anemia) in people with AR-HIES.  AR-HIES is characterized by abnormally high levels of an immune system protein called immunoglobulin E (IgE) in the blood; the levels are more than 10 times higher than normal. IgE normally triggers an immune response against foreign invaders in the body, particularly parasitic worms, and plays a role in allergies. It is unclear why people with AR-HIES have such high levels of this protein. People with AR-HIES also have highly elevated numbers of certain white blood cells called eosinophils (hypereosinophilia). Eosinophils aid in the immune response and are involved in allergic reactions.  Some people with AR-HIES have neurological problems, such as paralysis that affects the face or one side of the body (hemiplegia). Blockage of blood flow in the brain or abnormal bleeding in the brain, both of which can lead to stroke, can also occur in AR-HIES.  People with AR-HIES have a greater-than-average risk of developing cancer, particularly cancers of the blood or skin.
AR-HIES is a rare disorder whose prevalence is unknown.
AR-HIES is usually caused by mutations in the DOCK8 gene. The protein produced from this gene plays a critical role in the survival and function of several types of immune system cells. One of the protein's functions is to help maintain the structure and integrity of immune cells called T cells and NK cells, which recognize and attack foreign invaders, particularly as these cells travel to sites of infection within the body. In addition, DOCK8 is involved in chemical signaling pathways that stimulate other immune cells called B cells to mature and produce antibodies, which are specialized proteins that attach to foreign particles and germs, marking them for destruction.  DOCK8 gene mutations result in the production of little or no functional DOCK8 protein. Shortage of this protein impairs normal immune cell development and function. It is thought that T cells and NK cells lacking DOCK8 cannot maintain their shape as they move through dense spaces, such as those found within the skin. The abnormal cells die, resulting in reduced numbers of these cells. A shortage of these immune cells impairs the immune response to foreign invaders, accounting for the severe viral skin infections common in AR-HIES. A lack of DOCK8 also impairs B cell maturation and the production of antibodies. A lack of this type of immune response leads to recurrent respiratory tract infections in people with this disorder. It is unclear how DOCK8 gene mutations are involved in other features of AR-HIES, such as the elevation of IgE levels, autoimmunity, and neurological problems.  Some people with AR-HIES do not have mutations in the DOCK8 gene. The genetic cause of the condition in these individuals is unknown.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of autosomal recessive hyper-IgE syndrome:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hyperimmunoglobulin E syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hyperimmunoglobulin E Syndrome  - Merck Manual Professional Version: Hyperimmunoglobulin E Syndrome  - PID UK: Hyperimmunoglobulin E Syndromes Treatment and Immunizations   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care