 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hypothalamic hamartomas. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Death in infancy 50% Abnormality of cardiovascular system morphology - Anterior hypopituitarism - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cleft palate - Depressed nasal bridge - Glioma - Hip dislocation - Hydrocephalus - Hypothalamic hamartoma - Macrocephaly - Median cleft lip - Microglossia - Micromelia - Micropenis - Occipital encephalocele - Postaxial hand polydactyly - Pulmonary hypoplasia - Renal dysplasia - Short nose - Short ribs - Skeletal dysplasia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Hypothalamic dysfunction refers to a condition in which the hypothalamus is not working properly. The hypothalamus produces hormones that control body temperature, hunger, moods, release of hormones from many glands such as the pituitary gland, sex drive, sleep, and thirst. The signs and symptoms patients have vary depending on the hormones missing. A number of different causes including anorexia, bleeding, genetic disorder, tumors, and more have been linked to hypothalamic dysfunction. Treatment depends on the cause of the hypothalamic dysfunction.
 The signs and symptoms of hypothalamic dysfunction may vary from person to person depending on the specific hormones missing. You can read more by visiting the following link from MedlinePlus. http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/001202.htm
 Hypothalamic dysfunction may be caused by any of the following : Birth defects of the brain or hypothalamus (e.g. holoprosencephaly, septo-optic dysplasia) Genetic disorders (e.g. Prader-Willi syndrome, growth hormone deficiency) Eating disorders (e.g. anorexia, bulimia) Tumors (e.g. craniopharyngiomas, germinomas, meningiomas, gliomas, ependymomas, and gliomas of the optic nerve) Head trauma (e.g. boxing and varied injuries, birth trauma) Bacterial, viral, or fungal infections Autoimmune disorders (e.g. sarcoidosis) Malnutrition Cranial radiation Surgery Too much iron In some cases of hypothalamic dysfunction, the cause is unknown; these cases are referred to as having idiopathic hypothalamic dysfunction.
 Treatment is based on the specific cause of the hypothalamic dysfunction. For instance, if the condition is caused by a tumor, radiation and/or surgery may be warranted. If the hypothalamic dysfunction is caused by a hormone deficiency, the condition might be treated with hormone supplementation. If the cause is unknown, treatment may be symptomatic. To date, no successful treatment has been reported for idiopathic hypothalamic dysfunction.