Your thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in your neck, just above your collarbone. It is one of your endocrine glands, which make hormones. Thyroid hormones control the rate of many activities in your body. These include how fast you burn calories and how fast your heart beats. All of these activities are your body's metabolism. If your thyroid gland is not active enough, it does not make enough thyroid hormone to meet your body's needs. This condition is hypothyroidism.    Hypothyroidism is more common in women, people with other thyroid problems, and those over 60 years old. Hashimoto's disease, an autoimmune disorder, is the most common cause. Other causes include thyroid nodules, thyroiditis, congenital hypothyroidism, surgical removal of part or all of the thyroid, radiation treatment of the thyroid, and some medicines.    The symptoms can vary from person to person. They may include       - Fatigue    - Weight gain    - A puffy face    - Cold intolerance    - Joint and muscle pain    - Constipation    - Dry skin    - Dry, thinning hair    - Decreased sweating    - Heavy or irregular menstrual periods and fertility problems    - Depression    - Slowed heart rate       To diagnose hypothyroidism, your doctor will look at your symptoms and blood tests. Treatment is with synthetic thyroid hormone, taken every day.    NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
Congenital hypothyroidism is a condition that affects infants from birth and results from a partial or complete loss of thyroid function (hypothyroidism). The thyroid gland makes hormones that play an important role in regulating growth, brain development, and metabolism in the body. Congenital hypothyroidism occurs when the thyroid gland fails to develop or function properly. In the United States and many other countries, all newborns are tested for congenital hypothyroidism as part of newborn screening. If untreated, congenital hypothyroidism can lead to intellectual disability and abnormal growth. If treatment begins in the first month after birth, infants usually develop normally. Treatment involves medication to replace the missing thyroid hormones, such as levothyroxine. Most cases of congenital hypothyroidism occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. About 15-20% of cases are due to an underlying gene mutation. Rarely, congenital hypothyroidism can be a symptom included in a larger genetic disorder called a syndrome.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Congenital hypothyroidism. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the fontanelles or cranial sutures 90% Abnormality of the liver 90% Abnormality of the tongue 90% Abnormality of the voice 90% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the abdominal wall musculature 90% Constipation 90% Hypothyroidism 90% Muscular hypotonia 90% Sleep disturbance 90% Umbilical hernia 90% Coarse facial features 50% Cognitive impairment 50% Depressed nasal ridge 50% Dry skin 50% Hypothermia 50% Short stature 50% Sinusitis 50% Thickened skin 50% Abnormality of epiphysis morphology 7.5% Abnormality of reproductive system physiology 7.5% Abnormality of the pericardium 7.5% Anterior hypopituitarism 7.5% Arrhythmia 7.5% Cataract 7.5% Goiter 7.5% Hearing impairment 7.5% Hypertension 7.5% Hypotension 7.5% Intestinal obstruction 7.5% Nephrolithiasis 7.5% Optic atrophy 7.5% Oral cleft 7.5% Paresthesia 7.5% Tracheoesophageal fistula 7.5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Congenital hypothyroidism - Infantile onset - Thyroid hypoplasia - Thyroid-stimulating hormone excess - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Congenital hypothyroidism is a partial or complete loss of function of the thyroid gland (hypothyroidism) that affects infants from birth (congenital). The thyroid gland is a butterfly-shaped tissue in the lower neck. It makes iodine-containing hormones that play an important role in regulating growth, brain development, and the rate of chemical reactions in the body (metabolism). People with congenital hypothyroidism have lower-than-normal levels of these important hormones.  Congenital hypothyroidism occurs when the thyroid gland fails to develop or function properly. In 80 to 85 percent of cases, the thyroid gland is absent, severely reduced in size (hypoplastic), or abnormally located. These cases are classified as thyroid dysgenesis. In the remainder of cases, a normal-sized or enlarged thyroid gland (goiter) is present, but production of thyroid hormones is decreased or absent. Most of these cases occur when one of several steps in the hormone synthesis process is impaired; these cases are classified as thyroid dyshormonogenesis. Less commonly, reduction or absence of thyroid hormone production is caused by impaired stimulation of the production process (which is normally done by a structure at the base of the brain called the pituitary gland), even though the process itself is unimpaired. These cases are classified as central (or pituitary) hypothyroidism.  Signs and symptoms of congenital hypothyroidism result from the shortage of thyroid hormones. Affected babies may show no features of the condition, although some babies with congenital hypothyroidism are less active and sleep more than normal. They may have difficulty feeding and experience constipation. If untreated, congenital hypothyroidism can lead to intellectual disability and slow growth. In the United States and many other countries, all hospitals test newborns for congenital hypothyroidism. If treatment begins in the first two weeks after birth, infants usually develop normally.  Congenital hypothyroidism can also occur as part of syndromes that affect other organs and tissues in the body. These forms of the condition are described as syndromic. Some common forms of syndromic hypothyroidism include Pendred syndrome, Bamforth-Lazarus syndrome, and brain-lung-thyroid syndrome.
Congenital hypothyroidism affects an estimated 1 in 2,000 to 4,000 newborns. For reasons that remain unclear, congenital hypothyroidism affects more than twice as many females as males.
Congenital hypothyroidism can be caused by a variety of factors, only some of which are genetic. The most common cause worldwide is a shortage of iodine in the diet of the mother and the affected infant. Iodine is essential for the production of thyroid hormones. Genetic causes account for about 15 to 20 percent of cases of congenital hypothyroidism.  The cause of the most common type of congenital hypothyroidism, thyroid dysgenesis, is usually unknown. Studies suggest that 2 to 5 percent of cases are inherited. Two of the genes involved in this form of the condition are PAX8 and TSHR. These genes play roles in the proper growth and development of the thyroid gland. Mutations in these genes prevent or disrupt normal development of the gland. The abnormal or missing gland cannot produce normal amounts of thyroid hormones.  Thyroid dyshormonogenesis results from mutations in one of several genes involved in the production of thyroid hormones. These genes include DUOX2, SLC5A5, TG, and TPO. Mutations in each of these genes disrupt a step in thyroid hormone synthesis, leading to abnormally low levels of these hormones. Mutations in the TSHB gene disrupt the synthesis of thyroid hormones by impairing the stimulation of hormone production. Changes in this gene are the primary cause of central hypothyroidism. The resulting shortage of thyroid hormones disrupts normal growth, brain development, and metabolism, leading to the features of congenital hypothyroidism.  Mutations in other genes that have not been as well characterized can also cause congenital hypothyroidism. Still other genes are involved in syndromic forms of the disorder.
Most cases of congenital hypothyroidism are sporadic, which means they occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.  When inherited, the condition usually has an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. Typically, the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.  When congenital hypothyroidism results from mutations in the PAX8 gene or from certain mutations in the TSHR or DUOX2 gene, the condition has an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In some of these cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. Other cases result from new (de novo) mutations in the gene that occur during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) or in early embryonic development. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of congenital hypothyroidism:  - Baby's First Test  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital hypothyroidism  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hypothyroidism, congenital, nongoitrous, 1  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Congenital Hypothyroidism   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Hypothyroidism has many symptoms that can vary from person to person. Some common symptoms of hypothyroidism are
                
- fatigue  - weight gain  - a puffy face  - cold intolerance  - joint and muscle pain  - constipation  - dry skin  - dry, thinning hair  - decreased sweating  - heavy or irregular menstrual periods and impaired fertility  - depression  - slowed heart rate
                
However, hypothyroidism develops slowly, so many people dont notice symptoms of the disease.
                
Symptoms more specific to Hashimotos disease are a goiter and a feeling of fullness in the throat.
                
Hypothyroidism can contribute to high cholesterol, so people with high cholesterol should be tested for hypothyroidism. Rarely, severe, untreated hypothyroidism may lead to myxedema coma, an extreme form of hypothyroidism in which the bodys functions slow to the point that it becomes life threatening. Myxedema requires immediate medical treatment.
Many symptoms of hypothyroidism are the same as those of other diseases, so hypothyroidism usually cannot be diagnosed based on symptoms alone. With suspected hypothyroidism, health care providers take a medical history and perform a thorough physical examination. Health care providers may then use several blood tests to confirm a diagnosis of hypothyroidism and find its cause:
                
TSH test. The ultrasensitive TSH test is usually the first test a health care provider performs. This test detects even tiny amounts of TSH in the blood and is the most accurate measure of thyroid activity available. Generally, a TSH reading above normal means a person has hypothyroidism and a reading below normal means a person has hyperthyroidism.
                
Mildly elevated TSH without symptoms indicates subclinical hypothyroidism. Some health care providers treat subclinical hypothyroidism immediately. Others prefer to leave it untreated but monitor their patients for signs that the condition is worsening.
                
Health care providers may conduct additional tests to help confirm the diagnosis or determine the cause of hypothyroidism.
                
T4 test. This test measures the actual amount of circulating thyroid hormone in the blood. In hypothyroidism, the level of T4 in the blood is lower than normal.
                
Thyroid autoantibody test. This test looks for the presence of thyroid autoantibodies. Most people with Hashimotos disease have these antibodies, but people whose hypothyroidism is caused by other conditions do not.
                
More information about testing for thyroid problems is provided in the NIDDK health topic, Thyroid Tests.
Health care providers treat hypothyroidism with synthetic thyroxine, a medication that is identical to the hormone T4. The exact dose will depend on the patients age and weight, the severity of the hypothyroidism, the presence of other health problems, and whether the person is taking other drugs that might interfere with how well the body uses thyroid hormone.
                
Health care providers test TSH levels about 6 to 8 weeks after a patient begins taking thyroid hormone and make any necessary adjustments to the dose. Each time the dose is adjusted, the blood is tested again. Once a stable dose is reached, blood tests are normally repeated in 6 months and then once a year.
                
Hypothyroidism can almost always be completely controlled with synthetic thyroxine, as long as the recommended dose is taken every day as instructed.
Experts recommend that people eat a balanced diet to obtain most nutrients. More information about diet and nutrition can be found on the National Agricultural Library website at www.nutrition.gov.
                
Dietary Supplements
                
Iodine is an essential mineral for the thyroid. However, people with autoimmune thyroid disease may be sensitive to harmful side effects from iodine. Taking iodine drops or eating foods containing large amounts of iodinesuch as seaweed, dulse, or kelpmay cause or worsen hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism. More information about iodine can be found in the National Library of Medicine fact sheet Iodine in diet, available at www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/002421.htm.
                
Women need more iodine when they are pregnantabout 250 micrograms a day because the baby gets iodine from the mothers diet. In the United States, about 7 percent of pregnant women may not get enough iodine in their diet or through prenatal vitamins.3 Choosing iodized salt salt supplemented with iodineover plain salt and prenatal vitamins containing iodine will ensure this need is met.
                
To help ensure coordinated and safe care, people should discuss their use of dietary supplements, such as iodine, with their health care provider. Tips for talking with health care providers are available through the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health.