Childhood hypophosphatasia is a form of hypophosphatasia, a rare condition that affects the bones. Childhood hypophosphatasia, specifically, is generally diagnosed when the condition develops after six months of age but before adulthood. Signs and symptoms vary but may include delayed motor milestones; low bone mineral density for age; early loss of baby teeth (before age 5); bone and joint pain; short stature; a waddling gait; skeletal malformations; and/or unexplained broken bones. The forms of hypophosphatasia that develop during childhood are generally more mild than those that appear in infancy. Childhood hypophosphatasia is caused by changes (mutations) in the ALPL gene and can be inherited in an autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive manner. Treatment is supportive and based on the signs and symptoms present in each person. Recently an enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) called asfotase alfa has been show to improve bone symptoms in people with childhood hypophosphatasia and has been approved by the FDA.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Childhood hypophosphatasia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Bowing of the legs - Carious teeth - Craniosynostosis - Dolichocephaly - Elevated plasma pyrophosphate - Elevated urine pyrophosphate - Frontal bossing - Low alkaline phosphatase - Myopathy - Phosphoethanolaminuria - Premature loss of primary teeth - Proptosis - Rachitic rosary - Seizures - Short stature - Skin dimple over apex of long bone angulation - Waddling gait - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Hypophosphatasia (HPP) is a genetic condition that causes abnormal development of the bones and teeth. The severity of HPP can vary widely, from fetal death to fractures that don't begin until adulthood. Signs and symptoms may include poor feeding and respiratory problems in infancy; short stature; weak and soft bones; short limbs; other skeletal abnormalities; and hypercalcemia. Complications can be life-threatening. The mildest form of the condition, called odontohypophosphatasia, only affects the teeth. HPP is caused by mutations in the ALPL gene. Perinatal (onset before birth) and infantile HPP are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. The milder forms, especially adult forms and odontohypophosphatasia, may be inherited in an autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant manner. While treatment has always been symptomatic and supportive, recently an enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) called asfotase alfa has been show to improve bone manifestations people with childhood onset HPP and has been approved by the FDA.
 Hypophosphatasia (HPP) is a genetic condition caused by mutations in the ALPL gene. This gene gives the body instructions to make an enzyme called alkaline phosphatase, which is needed for mineralization of the bones and teeth. Mutations in this gene lead to an abnormal version of the enzyme, thus affecting the mineralization process. A shortage of the enzyme also causes other substances to build up in the body. These abnormalities lead to the features of HPP. ALPL mutations that almost completely eliminate alkaline phosphatase activity generally cause the more severe forms of HPP, while mutations that reduce activity to a lesser extent often cause the milder forms of HPP.
How  Perinatal (onset before birth) and infantile hypophosphatasia (HPP) are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that to be affected, a person must have a mutation in both copies of the responsible gene (ALPL) in each cell. Affected people inherit one mutated copy of the gene from each parent, who is referred to as a carrier. Carriers of an autosomal recessive condition typically do not have any signs or symptoms (they are unaffected). When 2 carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a: 25% (1 in 4) chance to be affected 50% (1 in 2) chance to be an unaffected carrier like each parent 25% chance to be unaffected and not be a carrier. The milder forms, especially adult HPP and odontohypophosphatasia, may be inherited in an autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant manner - depending on the effect the ALPL mutation has on enzyme activity. In autosomal dominant inheritance, having a mutation in only one copy of the ALPL gene in each cell is enough to cause features of the condition. When a person with a mutation that causes an autosomal dominant HPP has children, each child has a 50% (1 in 2) chance to inherit that mutation. Most people with autosomal dominant HPP have inherited the mutation from a parent who may or may not have symptoms. Not all people with a mutation that causes autosomal dominant HPP develop symptoms of the condition. While it is possible to have autosomal dominant HPP due to a new mutation that was not inherited (a de novo mutation), this has never been reported in HPP.
 Until recently, management of hypophosphatasia (HPP) has mostly been aimed at addressing symptoms of the condition. For example: Hydration, restriction of dietary calcium, vitamin D, and sometimes thiazide diuretics for hypercalcemia Ventilatory support for severely affected infants, some of which need a tracheostomy, which can lead to problems with speech and language development and tolerance of oral feeds Physiotherapy, occupational therapy and chronic pain management for pain and motor difficulty Surgery for fractures that fail to heal More recently, research has shown positive effects of human recombinant enzyme replacement therapy (ERT), called asfotase alfa, on people who began having symptoms before 6 months of age. There reportedly have been significant improvements in the X-ray appearances of bone tissue, along with improvements in growth, respiratory function, motor development and calcium homeostasis after 612 months of treatment. The children in the original study have now received more than three years of treatment, without apparent major side effects, and with continuing improvement in affected systems. Asfotase alfa appears to be a valuable emerging therapy for the treatment of bone manifestations in people with pediatric-onset HPP. In October of 2015 the FDA approved asfotase alfa, sold as Strensiq. Bone marrow and stem cell transplantation in infancy and childhood have improved the severity of the disease, but have not provided long term improvement.
Hypophosphatasia is an inherited disorder that affects the development of bones and teeth. This condition disrupts a process called mineralization, in which minerals such as calcium and phosphorus are deposited in developing bones and teeth. Mineralization is critical for the formation of bones that are strong and rigid and teeth that can withstand chewing and grinding.  The signs and symptoms of hypophosphatasia vary widely and can appear anywhere from before birth to adulthood. The most severe forms of the disorder tend to occur before birth and in early infancy. Hypophosphatasia weakens and softens the bones, causing skeletal abnormalities similar to another childhood bone disorder called rickets. Affected infants are born with short limbs, an abnormally shaped chest, and soft skull bones. Additional complications in infancy include poor feeding and a failure to gain weight, respiratory problems, and high levels of calcium in the blood (hypercalcemia), which can lead to recurrent vomiting and kidney problems. These complications are life-threatening in some cases.  The forms of hypophosphatasia that appear in childhood or adulthood are typically less severe than those that appear in infancy. Early loss of primary (baby) teeth is one of the first signs of the condition in children. Affected children may have short stature with bowed legs or knock knees, enlarged wrist and ankle joints, and an abnormal skull shape. Adult forms of hypophosphatasia are characterized by a softening of the bones known as osteomalacia. In adults, recurrent fractures in the foot and thigh bones can lead to chronic pain. Affected adults may lose their secondary (adult) teeth prematurely and are at increased risk for joint pain and inflammation.  The mildest form of this condition, called odontohypophosphatasia, only affects the teeth. People with this disorder typically experience abnormal tooth development and premature tooth loss, but do not have the skeletal abnormalities seen in other forms of hypophosphatasia.
Severe forms of hypophosphatasia affect an estimated 1 in 100,000 newborns. Milder cases, such as those that appear in childhood or adulthood, probably occur more frequently.  Hypophosphatasia has been reported worldwide in people of various ethnic backgrounds. This condition appears to be most common in white populations. It is particularly frequent in a Mennonite population in Manitoba, Canada, where about 1 in 2,500 infants is born with severe features of the condition.
Mutations in the ALPL gene cause hypophosphatasia.  The ALPL gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called alkaline phosphatase. This enzyme plays an essential role in mineralization of the skeleton and teeth. Mutations in the ALPL gene lead to the production of an abnormal version of alkaline phosphatase that cannot participate effectively in the mineralization process. A shortage of alkaline phosphatase allows several other substances, which are normally processed by the enzyme, to build up abnormally in the body. Researchers believe that a buildup of one of these compounds, inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi), underlies the defective mineralization of bones and teeth in people with hypophosphatasia.  ALPL mutations that almost completely eliminate the activity of alkaline phosphatase usually result in the more severe forms of hypophosphatasia. Other mutations, which reduce but do not eliminate the activity of the enzyme, are often responsible for milder forms of the condition.
The severe forms of hypophosphatasia that appear early in life are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Autosomal recessive inheritance means that two copies of the gene in each cell are altered. Most often, the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive disorder each carry one copy of the altered gene but do not show signs and symptoms of the disorder.  Milder forms of hypophosphatasia can have either an autosomal recessive or an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. Autosomal dominant inheritance means that one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of hypophosphatasia:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Hypophosphatasia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Adult hypophosphatasia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Childhood hypophosphatasia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hypophosphatasia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Infantile hypophosphatasia  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Osteomalacia   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care