Primary orthostatic hypotension is a rare type of orthostatic hypotension. It is not a disease per se, but a condition caused by several disorders that affect a specific part of the autonomic nervous system, such as multiple system atrophy, young-onset Parkinsons disease, pure autonomic failure, dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency, familial dysautonomia, and pure autonomic failure among others. The autonomic nervous system is the part of the nervous system that regulates certain involuntary body functions such as heart rate, blood pressure, sweating, and bowel and bladder control. Orthostatic hypotension is a form of low blood pressure that happens when standing-up from sitting or lying down. Common symptoms may include dizziness, lightheadedness, generalized weakness, leg buckling, nausea, blurry vision, fatigue, and headaches. Additional symptoms can include chest pain (angina), head and neck pain (often affecting neck and shoulders with a coat hanger distribution), decline in cognitive functioning such as difficulty concentrating, temporary loss of consciousness or blackout. Some people with primary orthostatic hypotension may also have high blood pressure when lying down. The treatment depends upon several factors including the specific underlying cause including The treatment depends upon several factors including the specific underlying cause and may include physical counter-maneuvers like lying down, sitting down, squatting clenching buttocks, leg crossing, and support garment and medication.
Hypotension can affect people of all ages. However, people in certain age groups are more likely to have certain types of hypotension.
                
Older adults are more likely to have orthostatic and postprandial hypotension. Children and young adults are more likely to have neurally mediated hypotension.
                
People who take certain medicinessuch as diuretics ("water pills") or other high blood pressure medicinesare at increased risk for hypotension. Certain conditions also increase the risk for hypotension. Examples include central nervous system disorders (such as Parkinson's disease) and some heart conditions.
                
Other risk factors for hypotension include being immobile (not being able to move around very much) for long periods, being out in the heat for a long time, and pregnancy. Hypotension during pregnancy is normal and usually goes away after birth.
Orthostatic Hypotension and Neurally Mediated Hypotension
                
The signs and symptoms of orthostatic hypotension and neurally mediated hypotension (NMH) are similar. They include:
                
Dizziness or light-headedness
                
Blurry vision
                
Confusion
                
Weakness
                
Fatigue (feeling tired)
                
Nausea (feeling sick to your stomach)
                
Orthostatic hypotension may happen within a few seconds or minutes of standing up after you've been sitting or lying down.
                
You may feel that you're going to faint, or you may actually faint. These signs and symptoms go away if you sit or lie down for a few minutes until your blood pressure adjusts to normal.
                
The signs and symptoms of NMH occur after standing for a long time or in response to an unpleasant, upsetting, or scary situation. The drop in blood pressure with NMH doesn't last long and often goes away after sitting down.
                
Severe Hypotension Linked to Shock
                
In shock, not enough blood and oxygen flow to the body's major organs, including the brain. The early signs and symptoms of reduced blood flow to the brain include light-headedness, sleepiness, and confusion.
                
In the earliest stages of shock, it may be hard to detect any signs or symptoms. In older people, the first symptom may only be confusion.
                
Over time, as shock worsens, a person won't be able to sit up without passing out. If the shock continues, the person will lose consciousness. Shock often is fatal if not treated right away.
                
Other signs and symptoms of shock vary, depending on what's causing the shock. When low blood volume (from major blood loss, for example) or poor pumping action in the heart (from heart failure, for example) causes shock:
                
The skin becomes cold and sweaty. It often looks blue or pale. If pressed, the color returns to normal more slowly than usual. A bluish network of lines appears under the skin.
                
The pulse becomes weak and rapid.
                
The person begins to breathe very quickly.
                
When extreme relaxation of blood vessels causes shock (such as in vasodilatory shock), a person feels warm and flushed at first. Later, the skin becomes cold and sweaty, and the person feels very sleepy.
                
Shock is an emergency and must be treated right away. If a person has signs or symptoms of shock, call 911.
Orthostatic hypotension is a sudden fall in blood pressure that occurs when a person assumes a standing position. It is due to a lesion of the baroreflex loop, which senses a change in blood pressure and adjusts heart rate and activates sympathetic nerve system fibers to cause the blood vessels to narrow and correct blood pressure. It may also be caused by hypovolemia (a decreased amount of blood in the body), resulting from the excessive use of diuretics, vasodilators, or other types of drugs, dehydration, or prolonged bed rest. The disorder may be associated with Addison's disease, diabetes, and certain neurological disorders including Multiple System Atrophy with Orthostatic Hypotension (formerly known as Shy-Drager syndrome), autonomic system neuropathies, and other dysautonomias. Symptoms, which generally occur after sudden standing, include dizziness, lightheadedness, blurred vision, and syncope (temporary loss of consciousness).
When orthostatic hypotension is caused by hypovolemia due to medications, the disorder may be reversed by adjusting the dosage or by discontinuing the medication. When the condition is caused by prolonged bed rest, improvement may occur by sitting up with increasing frequency each day. In some cases, physical counterpressure such as elastic hose or whole-body inflatable suits may be required. Dehydration is treated with salt and fluids. More severe cases can be treated with drugs, such as midodrine, to raise blood pressure.
The prognosis for individuals with orthostatic hypotension depends on the underlying cause of the condition.
The NINDS supports research on conditions such as neurogenic orthostatic hypotension aimed at increasing scientific understanding of the condition and finding ways to treat and prevent it.
Multiple system atrophy with orthostatic hypotension is the current classification for a neurological disorder that was once called Shy-Drager syndrome. A progressive disorder of the central and autonomic nervous systems, it is characterized by orthostatic hypotension (an excessive drop in blood pressure when standing up) which causes dizziness or fainting. Multiple system atrophy can occur without orthostatic hypotension, but instead have urinary involvement (urgency/incontinence). Doctors classify the disorder into 3 types: the Parkinsonian-type includes symptoms of Parkinson's disease such as slow movement, stiff muscles, and tremor; the cerebellar-type, which causes problems with coordination and speech; and the combined-type, which includes symptoms of both parkinsonism and cerebellar failure. Problems with urinary incontinence, constipation, and sexual impotence in men happen early in the course of the disease. Other symptoms include generalized weakness, double vision or other vision disturbances, difficulty breathing and swallowing, sleep disturbances, and decreased sweating. Because the disease resembles others, a correct diagnosis may take years.
There is no cure for multiple system atrophy with orthostatic hypotension. Treatment is aimed at controlling symptoms. Anti-Parkinson medication such as Sinemet may improve the general sense of well-being. Medications to elevate blood pressure while standing are often used, but may cause high blood pressure when lying down. Individuals should sleep with the head of the bed elevated. An artificial feeding tube or breathing tube may be required for problems with swallowing and breathing.
Most individuals with multiple system atrophy with orthostatic hypotension die within 7 to 10 years after the onset of symptoms. A problem with the respiratory system is the most common cause of death.
The NINDS supports research on disorders of the autonomic nervous system, including multiple system atrophy with orthostatic hypotension. This research is aimed at developing techniques to diagnose, treat, and prevent these disorders. Currently there are ongoing treatment trials of drugs to treat MSA.