Lamellar ichthyosis is a rare genetic condition that affects the skin. Infants affected by lamellar ichthyosis are generally born with a shiny, waxy layer of skin (called a collodian membrane) that is typically shed within the first two weeks of life. The skin beneath the collodian membrane is red and scaly. Other signs and symptoms of the condition may include ectropion, lips that turn outwards, hair loss, palmoplantar hyperkeratosis (thick skin on the palms of the hands and/or soles of the feet), nail abnormalities, dehydration and respiratory problems. Although the condition may be caused by changes (mutations) in one of several different genes, approximately 90% of cases are caused by mutations in the TGM1 gene. Lamellar ichthyosis is generally inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Lamellar ichthyosis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal hair quantity 90% Abnormality of the eyelid 90% Abnormality of the nail 90% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the eyebrow 90% Dry skin 90% Hyperkeratosis 90% Ichthyosis 90% Lack of skin elasticity 90% Pruritus 90% Abnormality of the helix 50% Abnormality of the teeth 7.5% Cognitive impairment 7.5% Dehydration 7.5% Gangrene 7.5% Otitis media 7.5% Recurrent respiratory infections 7.5% Renal insufficiency 7.5% Sepsis 7.5% Short stature 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Unfortunately, there is currently no cure for lamellar ichthyosis. Management is generally supportive and based on the signs and symptoms present in each person. For infants, providing a moist environment in an isolette (incubator) and preventing infection are most important. Petrolatum-based creams and ointments are used to keep the skin soft, supple, and hydrated. As affected children become older, treatments to promote peeling and thinning of the stratum corneum (the outermost layer of skin cells) are often recommended. This may include humidification with long baths, lubrication, and keratolytic agents such as alpha-hydroxy acid or urea preparations. For people with ectropion (turning out of the eyelid), lubrication of the cornea with artificial tears or prescription ointments is helpful to prevent the cornea from drying out. Topical or oral retinoid therapy may be recommended for those with severe skin involvement; however, these medications can be associated with undesired side effects and are, therefore, generally prescribed with caution.
Lamellar ichthyosis is a condition that mainly affects the skin. Infants with this condition are typically born with a tight, clear sheath covering their skin called a collodion membrane. This membrane usually dries and peels off during the first few weeks of life, and then it becomes obvious that affected babies have scaly skin, and eyelids and lips that are turned outward. People with lamellar ichthyosis typically have large, dark, plate-like scales covering their skin on most of their body. Infants with lamellar ichthyosis may develop infections, an excessive loss of fluids (dehydration), and respiratory problems. Affected individuals may also have hair loss (alopecia), abnormally formed fingernails and toenails (nail dystrophy), a decreased ability to sweat (hypohidrosis), an increased sensitivity to heat, and a thickening of the skin on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet (keratoderma). Less frequently, affected individuals have reddened skin (erythema) and joint deformities (contractures).
Lamellar ichthyosis is estimated to affect 1 in 100,000 individuals in the United States. This condition is more common in Norway, where an estimated 1 in 91,000 individuals are affected.
Mutations in one of many genes can cause lamellar ichthyosis. These genes provide instructions for making proteins that are found in the outermost layer of the skin (the epidermis). The skin abnormalities associated with lamellar ichthyosis disrupt the normal formation of the epidermis, resulting in impaired regulation of body temperature, water retention, and resistance to infections.  Mutations in the TGM1 gene are responsible for approximately 90 percent of cases of lamellar ichthyosis. The TGM1 gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called transglutaminase 1. This enzyme is involved in the formation of the cornified cell envelope, which is a structure that surrounds skin cells and helps form a protective barrier between the body and its environment. TGM1 gene mutations lead to severely reduced or absent enzyme production, which prevents the formation of the cornified cell envelope.  Mutations in other genes associated with lamellar ichthyosis are each responsible for only a small percentage of cases. In some people with lamellar ichthyosis, the cause of the disorder is unknown. Researchers have identified multiple chromosome regions that contain genes that may be associated with lamellar ichthyosis, although the specific genes have not been identified.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of lamellar ichthyosis:  - Foundation for Ichthyosis and Related Skin Types (FIRST): Skin Care Tips  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Autosomal Recessive Congenital Ichthyosis  - Genetic Testing Registry: Autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis 4A  - Genetic Testing Registry: Autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis 5  - Genetic Testing Registry: Autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis 8  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital ichthyosis of skin   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care