The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Immunodeficiency with hyper IgM type 5. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Epididymitis - IgA deficiency - IgG deficiency - Immunodeficiency - Impaired Ig class switch recombination - Increased IgM level - Lymphadenopathy - Recurrent bacterial infections - Recurrent upper and lower respiratory tract infections - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Hyper IgM syndrome is a type of primary immunodeficiency syndrome. Primary immunodeficiency occurs when part of a persons immune system is missing or does not work correctly. The bodies of people with primary immunodeficiency cant get rid of germs or protect themselves from new germs as well as they should. Primary immunodeficiencies are inherited, meaning they are passed down from parents to children. Hyper IgM syndromes are characterized by normal or elevated serum immunoglobulin M levels with absence of immunoglobulin G, A, and E. Immunoglobulins are proteins found in the blood. Hyper IgM results in a susceptibility to bacterial infections and sometimes opportunistic infections. There are five different types of hyper IgM syndromes (types 1-5). The types are distinguished by the location of the gene mutation involved.
 A flawed gene (or genes) in T-cells (a type of white blood cell that is part of the immune system and helps the body fight diseases or harmful substances) is responsible for hyper IgM syndrome. The faulty T-cells do not give B-cells a signal they need to switch from making IgM to IgA and IgG. Most cases (approximately 70%) of hyper-IgM syndrome are linked to a recessive mutation on the X chromosome. These cases are inherited as an X-linked recessive genetic trait. Because males do not have a second, healthy, X-chromosome to offset the disease, boys far out number girls with this disease. A small number of cases of hyper IgM syndrome have been attributed to autosomal recessive and autosomal dominant genetic inheritance. In addition, a rare acquired form of the disorder has been described in the medical literature.
 The cornerstone of treatment for individuals with hyper IgM syndrome is regular injections of intravenous immunogloblulin (IVIG). This treatment not only supplies missing IgG antibodies, but also prompts a drop in IgM antibodies. Patients with neutropenia can take granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). Antibiotics may also be prescribed to prevent the respiratory infection, pneumocystis carinii pneumonia. Most children with hyper-IgM syndrome respond well to treatment, become symptom-free and resume normal growth.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Immunodeficiency with hyper IgM type 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - IgA deficiency - IgG deficiency - Immunodeficiency - Impaired Ig class switch recombination - Lymphadenopathy - Recurrent bacterial infections - Recurrent infection of the gastrointestinal tract - Recurrent respiratory infections - Recurrent upper and lower respiratory tract infections - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
X-linked hyper IgM syndrome is a condition that affects the immune system and occurs almost exclusively in males. People with this disorder have abnormal levels of proteins called antibodies or immunoglobulins. Antibodies help protect the body against infection by attaching to specific foreign particles and germs, marking them for destruction. There are several classes of antibodies, and each one has a different function in the immune system. Although the name of this condition implies that affected individuals always have high levels of immunoglobulin M (IgM), some people have normal levels of this antibody. People with X-linked hyper IgM syndrome have low levels of three other classes of antibodies: immunoglobulin G (IgG), immunoglobulin A (IgA), and immunoglobulin E (IgE). The lack of certain antibody classes makes it difficult for people with this disorder to fight off infections.  Individuals with X-linked hyper IgM syndrome begin to develop frequent infections in infancy and early childhood. Common infections include pneumonia, sinus infections (sinusitis), and ear infections (otitis). Infections often cause these children to have chronic diarrhea and they fail to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive). Some people with X-linked hyper IgM syndrome have low levels of white blood cells called neutrophils (neutropenia). Affected individuals may develop autoimmune disorders, neurologic complications from brain and spinal cord (central nervous system) infections, liver disease, and gastrointestinal tumors. They also have an increased risk of lymphoma, which is a cancer of immune system cells.  The severity of X-linked hyper IgM syndrome varies among affected individuals, even among members of the same family. Without treatment, this condition can result in death during childhood or adolescence.
X-linked hyper IgM syndrome is estimated to occur in 2 per million newborn boys.
Mutations in the CD40LG gene cause X-linked hyper IgM syndrome. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called CD40 ligand, which is found on the surface of immune system cells known as T cells. CD40 ligand attaches like a key in a lock to its receptor protein, which is located on the surface of immune system cells called B cells. B cells are involved in the production of antibodies, and initially they are able to make only IgM antibodies. When CD40 ligand and its receptor protein are connected, they trigger a series of chemical signals that instruct the B cell to start making IgG, IgA, or IgE antibodies.  CD40 ligand is also necessary for T cells to interact with other cells of the immune system, and it plays a key role in T cell differentiation (the process by which cells mature to carry out specific functions).  Mutations in the CD40LG gene lead to the production of an abnormal CD40 ligand or prevent production of this protein. If CD40 ligand does not attach to its receptor on B cells, these cells cannot produce IgG, IgA, or IgE antibodies. Mutations in the CD40LG gene also impair the T cell's ability to differentiate and interact with other immune system cells. People with X-linked hyper IgM syndrome are more susceptible to infections because they do not have a properly functioning immune system.
This condition is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. The gene associated with this condition is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of X-linked hyper IgM syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: X-Linked Hyper IgM Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Immunodeficiency with hyper IgM type 1  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Immunodeficiency Disorders   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care