Dentinogenesis imperfecta type 2 is a rare and severe form of dentinogenesis imperfecta, a condition that affects tooth development. People affected by the condition may have weak and discolored teeth. These problems can affect both primary (baby) teeth and permanent teeth. People with this form of dentinogenesis imperfecta have no normal teeth. Sensorineural hearing loss has also been found in some affected people. Dentinogenesis imperfecta type 2 is caused by changes (mutations) in the DSPP gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Treatment is usually focused on protecting primary (baby) and then permanent teeth with preformed pediatric crowns and other interventions. The replacement of teeth might be considered in the future with dentures and/or implants.
Dentinogenesis imperfecta is a condition that results in issues with tooth development, causing the teeth to be translucent and discolored (most often a blue-gray or yellow-brown in color). Individuals with this disorder tend to have teeth that are weaker than normal which leads to increased wear, breakage, and loss of the teeth. This can affect both primary (baby) and permanent teeth. Dentinogenesis imperfecta is caused by mutations in the DSPP gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. There are three types of dentinogenesis imperfecta. Type I: occurs in people who have osteogenesis imperfecta, a genetic condition in which bones are brittle, causing them to break easily. Type II and type III: usually occur in people without another inherited disorder. Some families with type II also have progressive hearing loss. Type III was first identified in a population in Brandywine, Maryland. Some researchers believe that dentinogenesis imperfecta type II and type III, along with a similar condition called dentin dysplasia type II, are actually just different forms of a single disorder.
 Mutations in the DSPP gene cause dentinogenesis imperfecta. The DSPP gene provides instructions for making three proteins that are essential for normal tooth development. These proteins are involved in the formation of dentin, which is a bone-like substance that makes up the protective middle layer of each tooth. DSPP mutations alter the proteins made from the gene, leading to the production of abnormally soft dentin. Teeth with defective dentin are discolored, weak, and more likely to decay and break. It is unclear how DSPP mutations are related to hearing loss in some families with dentinogenesis imperfecta type II.
 Dentinogenesis imperfecta is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person has one parent with the condition.
 The aims of treatment are to remove sources of infection or pain, restore aesthetics and protect posterior teeth from wear. Treatment varies according to the age of the patient, severity of the problem and the presenting complaint. Crowns, caps or other forms of dental care are the most commonly used treatments. Dentures or dental implants may be necessary if the majority of teeth are lost. More detailed information regarding the treatment of dentinogenesis imperfecta can be found by visiting the following web links: https://www.dentistry.unc.edu/dentalprofessionals/resources/defects/di/ http://www.ojrd.com/content/3/1/31
Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spondylometaphyseal dysplasia with dentinogenesis imperfecta. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Brachydactyly syndrome 90% Joint hypermobility 90% Micromelia 90% Narrow chest 90% Platyspondyly 90% Short stature 90% Delayed eruption of teeth 50% Scoliosis 50% Depressed nasal bridge 7.5% Frontal bossing 7.5% Patent ductus arteriosus 7.5% Short nose 7.5% Strabismus 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Biconvex vertebral bodies - Cone-shaped epiphyses of the phalanges of the hand - Coronal cleft vertebrae - Delayed ossification of carpal bones - Dentinogenesis imperfecta - Flared iliac wings - Flat acetabular roof - Genu recurvatum - Genu varum - Irregular epiphyses - Long philtrum - Mesomelia - Metaphyseal cupping - Metaphyseal widening - Motor delay - Narrow face - Osteoporosis - Pectus carinatum - Prominent forehead - Respiratory distress - Short long bone - Short metacarpal - Short phalanx of finger - Small epiphyses - Spondylometaphyseal dysplasia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Dentinogenesis imperfecta is a disorder of tooth development. This condition causes the teeth to be discolored (most often a blue-gray or yellow-brown color) and translucent. Teeth are also weaker than normal, making them prone to rapid wear, breakage, and loss. These problems can affect both primary (baby) teeth and permanent teeth.  Researchers have described three types of dentinogenesis imperfecta with similar dental abnormalities. Type I occurs in people who have osteogenesis imperfecta, a genetic condition in which bones are brittle and easily broken. Dentinogenesis imperfecta type II and type III usually occur in people without other inherited disorders. A few older individuals with type II have had progressive high-frequency hearing loss in addition to dental abnormalities, but it is not known whether this hearing loss is related to dentinogenesis imperfecta.  Some researchers believe that dentinogenesis imperfecta type II and type III, along with a condition called dentin dysplasia type II, are actually forms of a single disorder. The signs and symptoms of dentin dysplasia type II are very similar to those of dentinogenesis imperfecta. However, dentin dysplasia type II affects the primary teeth much more than the permanent teeth.
Dentinogenesis imperfecta affects an estimated 1 in 6,000 to 8,000 people.
Mutations in the DSPP gene have been identified in people with dentinogenesis imperfecta type II and type III. Mutations in this gene are also responsible for dentin dysplasia type II. Dentinogenesis imperfecta type I occurs as part of osteogenesis imperfecta, which is caused by mutations in one of several other genes (most often the COL1A1 or COL1A2 genes).  The DSPP gene provides instructions for making two proteins that are essential for normal tooth development. These proteins are involved in the formation of dentin, which is a bone-like substance that makes up the protective middle layer of each tooth. DSPP gene mutations alter the proteins made from the gene, leading to the production of abnormally soft dentin. Teeth with defective dentin are discolored, weak, and more likely to decay and break. It is unclear whether DSPP gene mutations are related to the hearing loss found in a few older individuals with dentinogenesis imperfecta type II.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  In most cases, an affected person has one parent with the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of dentinogenesis imperfecta:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Dentinogenesis imperfecta - Shield's type II  - Genetic Testing Registry: Dentinogenesis imperfecta - Shield's type III  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Tooth - abnormal colors   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care