 The body stores urine in the bladder, which is a hollow organ, much like a balloon. During urination, muscles in the bladder tighten to move urine into a tube called the urethra. At the same time, the muscles around the urethra relax and let the urine pass out of the body. When the muscles in and around the bladder dont work the way they should, urine can leak. Short Periods of Leaking Sometimes urinary incontinence happens for a little while. Short periods of leaking urine can happen because of - urinary tract infections   - constipation  - some medicines.  urinary tract infections constipation some medicines. Longer Periods of Leaking  When leaking urine lasts longer, it may be due to - weak bladder muscles  - weak pelvic floor muscles  - overactive bladder muscles  - damage to nerves that control the bladder from diseases such as multiple sclerosis or Parkinsons disease  - blockage from an enlarged prostate in men  - diseases or conditions, such as arthritis, that may make it difficult to get to the bathroom in time  - pelvic organ prolapse, which is when pelvic organs (such as the bladder, rectum, or uterus) shift out of their normal place into the vagina. When pelvic organs are out of place, the bladder and urethra are not able to work normally, which may cause urine to leak. weak bladder muscles weak pelvic floor muscles overactive bladder muscles damage to nerves that control the bladder from diseases such as multiple sclerosis or Parkinsons disease blockage from an enlarged prostate in men diseases or conditions, such as arthritis, that may make it difficult to get to the bathroom in time pelvic organ prolapse, which is when pelvic organs (such as the bladder, rectum, or uterus) shift out of their normal place into the vagina. When pelvic organs are out of place, the bladder and urethra are not able to work normally, which may cause urine to leak. (Watch the video to learn how aging affects the bladder. To enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. To reduce the video, press the Escape (Esc) button on your keyboard.)
The first step in treating urinary incontinence is to see a health care provider. He or she will give you a physical exam and take your medical history. The provider will ask about your symptoms and the medicines you use. He or she will want to know if you have been sick recently or have had surgery. Your provider also may do a number of tests. These might include - urine tests  - tests that measure how well you empty your bladderusually by ultrasound. urine tests tests that measure how well you empty your bladderusually by ultrasound. In addition, your health care provider may ask you to keep a daily diary of when you urinate and when you leak urine. Your family provider may also send you to a urologist or urogynecologist, doctors who specialize in urinary tract problems Get tips on choosing a health care provider. (Watch the video above to learn more about what to expect when seeking care for a bladder problem. To enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. To reduce the video, press the Escape (Esc) button on your keyboard.)
Urinary incontinence means a person leaks urine by accident. Urinary incontinence is a common bladder problem as people age. Women are more likely than men to leak urine. If this problem is happening to you, there is help. Urinary incontinence can often be controlled. Talk to your health care provider about what you can do. Learn about urinary incontinence in women. Learn about urinary incontinence in men.
Today, there are more treatments for urinary incontinence than ever before. The choice of treatment depends on the type of bladder control problem you have, how serious it is, and what best fits your lifestyle. As a general rule, the simplest and safest treatments should be tried first. Treatment may include - bladder control training, such as pelvic floor muscle exercises and timed voiding  bladder control training, such as pelvic floor muscle exercises and timed voiding - lifestyle changes such as drinking the right amount of fluids, choosing water over other fluids, eating and drinking less caffeine, drinking less alcohol, limiting drinks before bedtime, keeping a healthy weight, and trying not to get constipated  lifestyle changes such as drinking the right amount of fluids, choosing water over other fluids, eating and drinking less caffeine, drinking less alcohol, limiting drinks before bedtime, keeping a healthy weight, and trying not to get constipated - medicines, medical devices, nerve stimulation, and surgery, if lifestyle changes and bladder training dont help.  medicines, medical devices, nerve stimulation, and surgery, if lifestyle changes and bladder training dont help. Learn more about how urinary incontinence is treated in men. Learn more about how urinary incontinence is treated in women.
Urinary incontinence is the loss of bladder control, which results in the accidental loss of urine. A child with UI may not stay dry during the day or night. Some UI is caused by a health problem such as
                
- a urinary tract infection (UTI)  - diabetes, a condition where blood glucose, also called blood sugar, is too high  - kidney problems  - nerve problems  - constipation, a condition in which a child has fewer than two bowel movements a week and stools can be hard, dry, small, and difficult to pass  - obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), a condition in which breathing is interrupted during sleep, often because of inflamed or enlarged tonsils  - a structural problem in the urinary tract
                
Most of the time, the exact cause of UI is not known, but it is often the result of more than one factor.
                
Although UI affects many children, it usually disappears naturally over time. UI after age 3the age when most children achieve daytime drynessmay cause great distress and embarrassment. Many children experience occasional UI, and treatment is available for most children who have a hard time controlling their bladder. Thus, caregivers of children who wet the bed or have accidents during the day should approach this problem with understanding and patience.
                
The age at which children achieve dryness varies. Wetting in younger children is common and not considered UI, so daytime UI is not usually diagnosed until age 5 or 6, and nighttime UI is not usually diagnosed until age 7.
                
Enuresis   Urinary incontinence is also called enuresis. Types of enuresis include the following:   - Primary enuresis is wetting in a child who has never been consistently dry.   - Secondary enuresis is wetting that begins after at least 6 months of dryness.   - Nocturnal enuresis is wetting that usually occurs during sleep, also called nighttime UI.   - Diurnal enuresis is wetting when awake, also called daytime UI.
By 5 years of age, more than 90 percent of children can control urination during the day. Nighttime wetting is more common than daytime wetting in children, affecting 30 percent of 4-year-olds. The condition resolves itself in about 15 percent of children each year; about 10 percent of 7-year-olds, 3 percent of 12-year-olds, and 1 percent of 18-year-olds continue to experience nighttime wetting.1
Daytime UI can be caused by a UTI or structural problems in the urinary tract. Daytime UI that is not associated with UTI or structural problems is less common and tends to disappear much earlier than nighttime UI. Overactive bladder and infrequent or incomplete voiding, or urination, are common causes of daytime UI.
                
Overactive Bladder
                
Overactive bladder is a condition in which a child experiences at least two of the following conditions:
                
- urinary urgencyinability to delay urination  - urge urinary incontinenceurinary leakage when the bladder contracts unexpectedly  - urinary frequencyurination eight or more times a day or more than twice at night
                
Infrequent or Incomplete Voiding
                
Infrequent voiding is when children voluntarily hold urine for prolonged periods of time. For example, children may not want to use the toilets at school or may not want to interrupt enjoyable activities, so they ignore the bodys signal of a full bladder. In these cases, the bladder can overfill and leak urine. In addition, these children often develop UTIs, leading to an irritated or overactive bladder.
                
Factors that may combine with infrequent voiding to produce daytime UI include
                
- small bladder capacity  - structural problems  - anxiety-causing events  - pressure from constipation  - drinks or foods that contain caffeine
                
Sometimes, overly demanding toilet training may make children unable to relax the sphincters enough to completely empty the bladder. Incomplete voiding may also lead to UTIs.
Eating, diet, and nutrition have not been shown to play a role in causing or preventing UI in children, though ensuring sufficient fluid intake throughout the day and avoiding caffeine intake may be helpful.
Urinary incontinence is the loss of bladder control, resulting in the accidental leakage of urine from the body. For example, a man may feel a strong, sudden need, or urgency, to urinate just before losing a large amount of urine, called urgency incontinence.
                
UI can be slightly bothersome or totally debilitating. For some men, the chance of embarrassment keeps them from enjoying many activities, including exercising, and causes emotional distress. When people are inactive, they increase their chances of developing other health problems, such as obesity and diabetes.
Urinary incontinence in men results when the brain does not properly signal the bladder, the sphincters do not squeeze strongly enough, or both. The bladder muscle may contract too much or not enough because of a problem with the muscle itself or the nerves controlling the bladder muscle. Damage to the sphincter muscles themselves or the nerves controlling these muscles can result in poor sphincter function. These problems can range from simple to complex.
                
A man may have factors that increase his chances of developing UI, including
                
- birth defectsproblems with development of the urinary tract  - a history of prostate cancersurgery or radiation treatment for prostate cancer can lead to temporary or permanent UI in men
                
UI is not a disease. Instead, it can be a symptom of certain conditions or the result of particular events during a mans life. Conditions or events that may increase a mans chance of developing UI include
                
- benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH)a condition in which the prostate is enlarged yet not cancerous. In men with BPH, the enlarged prostate presses against and pinches the urethra. The bladder wall becomes thicker. Eventually, the bladder may weaken and lose the ability to empty, leaving some urine in the bladder. The narrowing of the urethra and incomplete emptying of the bladder can lead to UI.  - chronic coughinglong-lasting coughing increases pressure on the bladder and pelvic floor muscles.  - neurological problemsmen with diseases or conditions that affect the brain and spine may have trouble controlling urination.  - physical inactivitydecreased activity can increase a mans weight and contribute to muscle weakness.  - obesityextra weight can put pressure on the bladder, causing a need to urinate before the bladder is full.  - older agebladder muscles can weaken over time, leading to a decrease in the bladders capacity to store urine.
                
More information is provided in the NIDDK health topics, Nerve Disease and Bladder Control and Prostate Enlargement: Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia.
Urinary incontinence occurs in 11 to 34 percent of older men. Two to 11 percent of older men report daily UI.1 Although more women than men develop UI, the chances of a man developing UI increase with age because he is more likely to develop prostate problems as he ages. Men are also less likely to speak with a health care professional about UI, so UI in men is probably far more common than statistics show. Having a discussion with a health care professional about UI is the first step to fixing this treatable problem.
People who smoke should stop. Quitting smoking at any age promotes bladder health and overall health. Smoking increases a persons chance of developing stress incontinence, as it increases coughing. Some people say smoking worsens their bladder irritation. Smoking causes most cases of bladder cancer. People who smoke for many years have a higher risk of bladder cancer than nonsmokers or those who smoke for a short time.2 People who smoke should ask for help so they do not have to try quitting alone. Call 1-800-QUITNOW (1-800-784-8669) for more information.
- Urinary incontinence (UI) is the loss of bladder control, resulting in the accidental leakage of urine from the body.  - The urinary tract is the bodys drainage system for removing urine, which is composed of wastes and extra fluid.  - Every day, the kidneys filter about 120 to 150 quarts of blood to produce about 1 to 2 quarts of urine.  - To urinate, the brain signals the muscular bladder wall to tighten, squeezing urine out of the bladder. At the same time, the brain signals the sphincters to relax. As the sphincters relax, urine exits the bladder through the urethra.  - UI results when the brain does not properly signal the bladder, the sphincters do not squeeze strongly enough, or both.  - Urgency incontinence happens when a man urinates involuntarily after he has a strong desire, or urgency, to urinate.  - Stress incontinence results from movements that put pressure on the bladder and cause urine leakage, such as coughing, sneezing, laughing, or physical activity.  - Functional incontinence occurs when physical disability, external obstacles, or problems in thinking or communicating keep a person from reaching a place to urinate in time.  - When the bladder doesnt empty properly, urine spills over, causing overflow incontinence. Weak bladder muscles or a blocked urethra can cause this type of incontinence.  - Transient incontinence is UI that lasts a short time. Transient incontinence is usually a side effect of certain medications, drugs, or temporary conditions.  - UI occurs in 11 to 34 percent of older men.  - Men should tell a health care professional, such as a family practice physician, a nurse, an internist, or a urologist, they have UI, even if they feel embarrassed.  - Treatment depends on the type of UI. Some types of treatment include behavioral and lifestyle changes, bladder training, pelvic floor exercises, and urgency suppression.  - People who smoke should stop. Quitting smoking at any age promotes bladder health and overall health.