 During their first year, babies start to develop skills they will use for the rest of their lives. The normal growth of babies can be broken down into the following areas:       - Gross motor - controlling the head, sitting, crawling, maybe even starting to walk    - Fine motor - holding a spoon, picking up a piece of cereal between thumb and finger    - Sensory - seeing, hearing, tasting, touching and smelling    - Language - starting to make sounds, learning some words, understanding what people say     - Social - the ability to play with family members and other children       Babies do not develop at the same rate. There is a wide range of what is considered "normal." Your baby may be ahead in some areas and slightly behind in others. If you are worried about possible delays, talk to your baby's health care provider.
Summary : It is hard when your baby is sick. Common health problems in babies include colds, coughs, fevers, and vomiting. Babies also commonly have skin problems, like diaper rash or cradle cap.    Many of these problems are not serious. It is important to know how to help your sick baby, and to know the warning signs for more serious problems. Trust your intuition - if you are worried about your baby, call your health care provider right away.
Summary : Going home with a new baby is exciting, but it can be scary, too. Newborns have many needs, like frequent feedings and diaper changes. Babies can have health issues that are different from older children and adults, like diaper rash and cradle cap.     Your baby will go through many changes during the first year of life. You may feel uneasy at first. Ask your health care provider for help if you need it.
Summary : Food provides the energy and nutrients that babies need to be healthy. For a baby, breast milk is best. It has all the necessary vitamins and minerals. Infant formulas are available for babies whose mothers are not able or decide not to breastfeed.    Infants usually start eating solid foods between 4 and 6 months of age. Check with your health care provider for the best time for your baby to start. If you introduce one new food at a time, you will be able to identify any foods that cause allergies in your baby. Some foods to stay away from include       - Eggs    - Honey    - Peanuts (including peanut butter)    - Other tree nuts
Summary : It can be scary when your baby is sick, especially when it is not an everyday problem like a cold or a fever. You may not know whether the problem is serious or how to treat it. If you have concerns about your baby's health, call your health care provider right away.    Learning information about your baby's condition can help ease your worry. Do not be afraid to ask questions about your baby's care. By working together with your health care provider, you make sure that your baby gets the best care possible.