Ohtahara syndrome is a neurological disorder characterized by seizures.  The disorder affects newborns, usually within the first three months of life (most often within the first 10 days) in the form of epileptic seizures.  Infants have primarily tonic seizures (which cause stiffening of muscles of the body, generally those in the back, legs, and arms), but may also experience partial seizures, and rarely, myoclonic seizures (which cause jerks or twitches of the upper body, arms, or legs). Ohtahara syndrome is most commonly caused by metabolic disorders or structural damage in the brain, although the cause or causes for many cases cant be determined. Most infants with the disorder show significant underdevelopment of part or all of the cerebral hemispheres.  The EEGs of infants with Ohtahara syndrome reveal a characteristic pattern of high voltage spike wave discharge followed by little activity.  This pattern is known as burst suppression. The seizures associated with Ohtahara syndrome are difficult to treat and the syndrome is severely progressive. Some children with this condition go on to develop other epileptic disorders such as West syndrome and Lennox-Gestaut syndrome.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy 25. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Epileptic encephalopathy - Muscular hypotonia of the trunk - Status epilepticus - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy 4 (EIEE4) is a form of early infantile epileptic encephalopathy, which refers to a group of neurological conditions characterized by severe seizures beginning in infancy. EIEE4, specifically, is often associated with partial complex or tonic-clonic seizures, although other seizure types have been reported. Other signs and symptoms may include intellectual disability, reduced muscle tone (hypotonia), hypsarrhythmia (an irregular pattern seen on EEG), dyskinesia (involuntary movement of the body), and spastic di- or quadriplegia. EIEE4 is caused by changes (mutations) in the STXBP1 gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person. For example, certain medications are often prescribed to help control seizures, although they are not always effective in all people with the condition.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy 4. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Absent speech - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Cerebral atrophy - Cerebral hypomyelination - Developmental regression - EEG with burst suppression - Epileptic encephalopathy - Epileptic spasms - Generalized myoclonic seizures - Generalized tonic seizures - Generalized tonic-clonic seizures - Hypoplasia of the corpus callosum - Hypsarrhythmia - Impaired horizontal smooth pursuit - Infantile encephalopathy - Intellectual disability, severe - Muscular hypotonia - Neonatal onset - Severe global developmental delay - Spastic paraplegia - Spastic tetraplegia - Status epilepticus - Tremor - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.