Baylisascaris roundworms are intestinal parasites found in many different animals. Baylisascaris infection in humans is uncommon but can be severe. While Baylisascaris can infect different types of animals, Baylisascaris procyonis, carried by raccoons, is thought to pose the greatest risk to humans because raccoons often live in close proximity to humans. Humans can acquire the parasite by ingesting the eggs of infected raccoons. Young children are at greatest risk for Baylisascaris infection because they are more likely to put contaminated soil in their mouths. Though rare, human infections can be severe if the parasite invades the eye (ocular larva migrans), organs (visceral larva migrans), or the brain (neural larva migrans). Symptoms of a Baylisascaris infection may include nausea, fatigue, an enlarged liver, loss of coordination, lack of muscle control, blindness, and coma. Baylisascaris infections cannot be spread from one person to another. No drug has been found to be completely effective against Baylisascaris infections in humans though albendazole has been used in some cases.
 No drug has been found to be completely effective in treating Baylisascaris infections in humans. Albendazole is currently considered to be the drug of choice. Corticosteroids may also be given to reduce inflammation. In many cases, significant damage has already occurred by the time treatment has started. Early diagnosis and treatment provide the best chance of recovery.
Baylisascaris worms are intestinal parasites found in a wide variety of animals. Different species of Baylisascaris are associated with different animal hosts. For example, Baylisascaris procyonis is found in raccoons and Baylisascaris columnaris is an intestinal parasite found in skunks. Cases of Baylisascaris infection in people are not frequently reported, but can be severe. Baylisascaris procyonis is thought to pose the greatest risk to humans because of the often close association of raccoons to human dwellings.
If you suspect you have been infected, consult your health care provider immediately. Be sure to tell your health care provider if you have recently been exposed to raccoons or their feces.
    
Diagnosis is difficult because symptoms depend on the number of infecting larvae and location in the body. Ocular larva migrans, when the larvae migrate to the eye, can cause sensitivity to light, inflammation of the eye, and blindness. Symptoms of visceral larva migrans, when the larvae travel to organs, depend on which organs are affected. For example, an invasion of the liver may cause hepatomegaly (inflammation and enlargement of the liver), while an invasion of the lung may cause pulmonary symptoms such as cough or chest pain. Larvae rarely end up in the nervous system but the most severe cases are neural larva migrans, when the larvae migrate into the brain and cause it to swell (encephalitis). There is no commercially available test for Baylisascaris infection. A health care provider may test blood, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and tissue to determine if an individual is infected. Eye examinations may reveal a migrating larva or lesions and are often the most significant clue to infection with Baylisascaris.
    
Diagnosis often is made by ruling out other infections that cause similar symptoms. Information on diagnosis and testing can be obtained through your local or state health department or CDC.
    
More on: Resources for Health Professionals: Diagnosis
No drugs have been shown to be totally effective for the treatment of Baylisascaris infection. Albendazole, a broad spectrum anthelmintic, has been recommended for specific cases.
    
Early treatment might reduce serious damage caused by the infection. Should you suspect you may have ingested raccoon feces, seek immediate medical attention.
    
More on: Resources for Health Professionals: Treatment