A pinworm ("threadworm") is a small, thin, white roundworm (nematode) called Enterobius vermicularis that sometimes lives in the colon and rectum of humans. Pinworms are about the length of a staple. While an infected person sleeps, female pinworms leave the intestine through the anus and deposit their eggs on the surrounding skin.
Risk Factors
    
The people most likely to be infected with pinworm are children under 18, people who take care of infected children and people who are institutionalized. In these groups, the prevalence can reach 50%.
    
Pinworm is the most common worm infection in the United States. Humans are the only species that can transfer this parasite. Household pets like dogs and cats cannot become infected with human pinworms. Pinworm eggs can survive in the indoor environment for 2 to 3 weeks.
    Epidemiology
    
Pinworm infections are more common within families with school-aged children, in primary caregivers of infected children, and in institutionalized children.
    
A person is infected with pinworms by ingesting pinworm eggs either directly or indirectly. These eggs are deposited around the anus by the worm and can be carried to common surfaces such as hands, toys, bedding, clothing, and toilet seats. By putting anyone’s contaminated hands (including one’s own) around the mouth area or putting one’s mouth on common contaminated surfaces, a person can ingest pinworm eggs and become infected with the pinworm parasite. Since pinworm eggs are so small, it is possible to ingest them while breathing.
    
Once someone has ingested pinworm eggs, there is an incubation period of 1 to 2 months or longer for the adult gravid female to mature in the small intestine. Once mature, the adult female worm migrates to the colon and lays eggs around the anus at night, when many of their hosts are asleep. People who are infected with pinworm can transfer the parasite to others for as long as there is a female pinworm depositing eggs on the perianal skin. A person can also re-infect themselves, or be re-infected by eggs from another person.
A person infected with pinworm is often asymptomatic, but itching around the anus is a common symptom. Diagnosis of pinworm can be reached from three simple techniques. The first option is to look for the worms in the perianal reqion 2 to 3 hours after the infected person is asleep. The second option is to touch the perianal skin with transparent tape to collect possible pinworm eggs around the anus first thing in the morning. If a person is infected, the eggs on the tape will be visible under a microscope. The tape method should be conducted on 3 consecutive mornings right after the infected person wakes up and before he/she does any washing. Since anal itching is a common symptom of pinworm, the third option for diagnosis is analyzing samples from under fingernails under a microscope. An infected person who has scratched the anal area may have picked up some pinworm eggs under the nails that could be used for diagnosis.
    
Since pinworm eggs and worms are often sparse in stool, examining stool samples is not recommended. Serologic tests are not available for diagnosing pinworm infections.
The medications used for the treatment of pinworm are mebendazole, pyrantel pamoate, and albendazole. All three of these drugs are to be given in 1 dose at first and then another single dose 2 weeks later. Pyrantel pamoate is available without prescription. The medication does not reliably kill pinworm eggs. Therefore, the second dose is to prevent re-infection by adult worms that hatch from any eggs not killed by the first treatment.Health practitioners and parents should weigh the health risks and benefits of these drugs for patients under 2 years of age.
    
Repeated infections should be treated by the same method as the first infection. In households where more than one member is infected or where repeated, symptomatic infections occur, it is recommended that all household members be treated at the same time. In institutions, mass and simultaneous treatment, repeated in 2 weeks, can be effective.
Washing your hands with soap and warm water after using the toilet, changing diapers, and before handling food is the most successful way to prevent pinworm infection. In order to stop the spread of pinworm and possible re-infection, people who are infected should bathe every morning to help remove a large amount of the eggs on the skin. Showering is a better method than taking a bath, because showering avoids potentially contaminating the bath water with pinworm eggs. Infected people should not co-bathe with others during their time of infection.
    
Also, infected people should comply with good hygiene practices such as washing their hands with soap and warm water after using the toilet, changing diapers, and before handling food. They should also cut fingernails regularly, and avoid biting the nails and scratching around the anus. Frequent changing of underclothes and bed linens first thing in the morning is a great way to prevent possible transmission of eggs in the environment and risk of reinfection. These items should not be shaken and carefully placed into a washer and laundered in hot water followed by a hot dryer to kill any eggs that may be there.
    
In institutions, day care centers, and schools, control of pinworm can be difficult, but mass drug administration during an outbreak can be successful. Teach children the importance of washing hands to prevent infection.
    
More on: Handwashing
Angiostrongylus cantonensis is a parasitic worm of rats. It is also called the rat lungworm. The adult form of the parasite is found only in rodents. Infected rats pass larvae of the parasite in their feces. Snails and slugs get infected by ingesting the larvae. These larvae mature in snails and slugs but do not become adult worms. The life cycle is completed when rats eat infected snails or slugs and the larvae further mature to become adult worms.
Angiostrongylus cantonensis
    
Diagnosing A. cantonensis infections can be difficult, in part because there are no readily available blood tests. Important clues that could lead to the diagnosis of infection are a history of travel to where the parasite is known to be found and ingestion of raw or undercooked snails, slugs, or possibly transport hosts (such as frogs, fresh water shrimp or land crabs) in those areas. A high level of eosinophils, a blood cell that can be elevated in the presence of a parasite, in the blood or in the fluid that surrounds the brain can be another important clue. Persons worried that they might be infected should consult their health care provider.
    
     
    Angiostrongylus costaricensis
    
Diagnosing A. costaricensis infections can be difficult, in part because there are no readily available blood tests. Important clues that could lead to the diagnosis of infection are a history of travel to where the parasite is known to be found and ingestion of raw or undercooked slugs or food contaminated by infected slugs or their slime. A high blood level of eosinophils, a blood cell that can be elevated in the presence of a parasite, can be another important clue. Persons worried that they might be infected should consult their health care provider.
Angiostrongylus cantonensis
    
There is no specific treatment for A. cantonensis infection. There is some evidence that certain supportive treatments may reduce the severity of headache and the duration of symptoms. Persons with symptoms should consult their health care provider for more information.
    Angiostrongylus costaricensis
    
There is no specific treatment for A. costaricensis infections. Most infections resolve spontaneously though sometime surgical treatment is necessary to removed portions of inflamed intestine. Persons with symptoms should consult their health care provider for more information.
Angiostrongylus cantonensis
    
Prevention of A. cantonensis infections involves educating persons residing in or traveling to areas where the parasite is found about not ingesting raw or undercooked snails and slugs, freshwater shrimp, land crabs, frogs, and monitor lizards, or potentially contaminated vegetables, or vegetable juice. Removing snails, slugs, and rats found near houses and gardens should also help reduce risk. Thoroughly washing hands and utensils after preparing raw snails or slugs is also recommended. Vegetables should be thoroughly washed if eaten raw.
    Angiostrongylus costaricensis
    
Prevention of A. costaricensis infections involves educating persons residing in and traveling to areas where the parasite is known to be found about not ingesting raw or undercooked slugs or potentially contaminated vegetables or vegetable juices. Removing slugs and rats found near houses and gardens should help reduce risk. Thoroughly washing hands and utensils after preparing raw slugs is also recommended. Vegetables should be thoroughly washed if eaten raw.
Infected dogs and cats shed Toxocara eggs in their feces into the environment. Once in the environment, it takes 2 to 4 weeks for Toxocara larvae to develop and for the eggs to become infectious. Humans or other animals can be infected by accidentally ingesting Toxocara eggs. For example, humans can become infected if they work with dirt and accidentally ingest dirt containing Toxocara eggs. Although rare, people can be infected by eating undercooked or raw meat from an infected animal such as a lamb or rabbit. Because dogs and cats are frequently found where people live, there may be large numbers of infected eggs in the environment. Once in the body, the Toxocara eggs hatch and roundworm larvae can travel in the bloodstream to different parts of the body, including the liver, heart, lungs, brain, muscles, or eyes. Most infected people do not have any symptoms. However, in some people, the Toxocara larvae can cause damage to these tissues and organs. The symptoms of toxocariasis, the disease caused by these migrating larvae, include fever, coughing, inflammation of the liver, or eye problems.
    
A U.S. study in 1996 showed that 30% of dogs younger than 6 months deposit Toxocara eggs in their feces; other studies have shown that almost all puppies are born already infected with Toxocara canis. Research also suggests that 25% of all cats are infected with Toxocara cati. Infection rates are higher for dogs and cats that are left outside for more time and allowed to eat other animals. In humans, it has been found that almost 14% of the U.S. population has been infected with Toxocara. Globally, toxocariasis is found in many countries, and prevalence rates can reach as high as 40% or more in parts of the world. There are several factors that have been associated with higher rates of infection with Toxocara. People are more likely to be infected with Toxocara if they own a dog. Children and adolescents under the age of 20 are more likely to test positive for Toxocara infection. This may be because children are more likely to eat dirt and play in outdoor environments, such as sandboxes, where dog and cat feces can be found. This infection is more common in people living in poverty. Geographic location plays a role as well, because Toxocara is more prevalent in hot, humid regions where eggs are kept viable in the soil.
If you think you or your child may have toxocariasis, you should see your health care provider to discuss the possibility of infection and, if necessary, to be examined. Toxocariasis can be difficult to diagnose because the symptoms of toxocariasis are similar to the symptoms of other infections. A blood test is available that looks for evidence of infection with Toxocara larvae. In addition to the blood test, diagnosis of toxocariasis includes identifying the presence of typical clinical signs of VT or OT and a history of exposure to cats and dogs.
Visceral toxocariasis can be treated with antiparasitic drugs such as albendazole or mebendazole. Treatment of ocular toxocariasis is more difficult and usually consists of measures to prevent progressive damage to the eye.
    
More on: Resources For Health Professionals: Treatment
Controlling Toxocara infection in dogs and cats will reduce the number of infectious eggs in the environment and reduce the risk of infection for people. Have your veterinarian treat your dogs and cats, especially young animals, regularly for worms. This is especially important if your pets spend time outdoors and may become infected again.
    
There are several things that you can do around your home to make you and your pets safer:
    
     - Clean your pet’s living area at least once a week. Feces should be either buried or bagged and disposed of in the trash. Wash your hands after handling pet waste.
     - Do not allow children to play in areas that are soiled with pet or other animal feces and cover sandboxes when not in use to make sure that animals do not get inside and contaminate them.
     - Wash your hands with soap and warm water after playing with your pets or other animals, after outdoor activities, and before handling food.
     - Teach children the importance of washing hands to prevent infection.
     - Teach children that it is dangerous to eat dirt or soil.
    
    
More on: Handwashing
    
Toxocara eggs have a strong protective layer which makes the eggs able to survive in the environment for months or even years under the right conditions. Many common disinfectants are not effective against Toxocara eggs but extreme heat has been shown to kill the eggs. Prompt removal of animal feces can help prevent infection since the eggs require 2 to 4 weeks to become infective once they are out of the animal.
Fascioliasis is an infectious disease caused by Fasciola parasites, which are flat worms referred to as liver flukes. The adult (mature) flukes are found in the bile ducts and liver of infected people and animals, such as sheep and cattle. In general, fascioliasis is more common in livestock and other animals than in people.
Two Fasciola species (types) infect people. The main species is Fasciola hepatica, which is also known as "the common liver fluke" and "the sheep liver fluke." A related species, Fasciola gigantica, also can infect people.
The standard way to be sure a person is infected with Fasciola is by seeing the parasite. This is usually done by finding Fasciola eggs in stool (fecal) specimens examined under a microscope. More than one specimen may need to be examined to find the parasite. Sometimes eggs are found by examining duodenal contents or bile.
    
Infected people don't start passing eggs until they have been infected for several months; people don't pass eggs during the acute phase of the infection. Therefore, early on, the infection has to be diagnosed in other ways than by examining stool. Even during the chronic phase of infection, it can be difficult to find eggs in stool specimens from people who have light infections.
    
Certain types of blood tests can be helpful for diagnosing Fasciola infection, including routine blood work and tests that detect antibodies (an immune response) to the parasite.
    
More on: Resources for Health Professionals: Diagnosis
The first step is to make sure the diagnosis is correct. For more information, patients should consult their health care provider. Health care providers may consult with CDC staff about the diagnosis and treatment of fascioliasis.
    
The drug of choice is triclabendazole. In the United States, this drug is available through CDC, under a special (investigational) protocol. The drug is given by mouth, usually in one or two doses. Most people respond well to the treatment.
    
More on: Resources for Health Professionals: Treatment
No vaccine is available to protect people against Fasciola infection.
    
In some areas of the world where fascioliasis is found (endemic), special control programs are in place or are planned. The types of control measures depend on the setting (such as epidemiologic, ecologic, and cultural factors). Strict control of the growth and sale of watercress and other edible water plants is important.
    
Individual people can protect themselves by not eating raw watercress and other water plants, especially from endemic grazing areas. As always, travelers to areas with poor sanitation should avoid food and water that might be contaminated (tainted). Vegetables grown in fields that might have been irrigated with polluted water should be thoroughly cooked, as should viscera from potentially infected animals.
Whipworm (Trichuris trichiura) is an intestinal parasite of humans. The larvae and adult worms live in the intestine of humans and can cause intestinal disease. The name is derived from the worm’s distinctive whip-like shape.
Whipworm is a soil-transmitted helminth (STH) and is the third most common roundworm of humans. Whipworm causes an infection called trichuriasis and often occurs in areas where human feces is used as fertilizer or where defecation onto soil happens. The worms are spread from person to person by fecal-oral transmission or through feces-contaminated food.
    Geographic Distribution
Worldwide, infection occurs more frequently in areas with tropical weather and poor sanitation practices, and among children. In 2002, the estimated number of persons infected with whipworm was 1 billion. Trichuriasis also occurs in the southern United States.
The standard method for diagnosing the presence of whipworm is by microscopically identifying whipworm eggs in a stool sample. Because eggs may be difficult to find in light infections, a concentration procedure is recommended.
Anthelminthic medications (drugs that rid the body of parasitic worms), such as albendazole and mebendazole, are the drugs of choice for treatment. Infections are generally treated for 3 days. The recommended medications are effective. Health care providers may decide to repeat a stool exam after treatment. Iron supplements may also be prescribed if the infected person suffers from anemia.
    
More on: Resources for Health Professionals: Treatment
The best way to prevent whipworm infection is to always:
    
     - Avoid ingesting soil that may be contaminated with human feces, including where human fecal matter ("night soil") or wastewater is used to fertilize crops.
     - Wash your hands with soap and warm water before handling food.
     - Teach children the importance of washing hands to prevent infection.
     - Wash, peel, or cook all raw vegetables and fruits before eating, particularly those that have been grown in soil that has been fertilized with manure.
    
    
More on: Handwashing
    
Transmission of infection to others can be prevented by
    
     - Not defecating outdoors.
     - Effective sewage disposal systems.