Androgen insensitivity syndrome is a condition that affects sexual development before birth and during puberty. People with this condition are genetically male, with one X chromosome and one Y chromosome in each cell. Because their bodies are unable to respond to certain male sex hormones (called androgens), they may have some physical traits of a woman. Androgen insensitivity syndrome is caused by mutations in the AR gene and is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Androgen insensitivity syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal hair quantity 90% Abnormality of female internal genitalia 90% Cryptorchidism 90% Decreased fertility 90% Male pseudohermaphroditism 90% Hernia of the abdominal wall 50% Testicular neoplasm 7.5% Absent facial hair - Elevated follicle stimulating hormone - Elevated luteinizing hormone - Female external genitalia in individual with 46,XY karyotype - Growth abnormality - Gynecomastia - Inguinal hernia - Neoplasm - Primary amenorrhea - Sparse axillary hair - Sparse pubic hair - X-linked recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome is a condition that affects sexual development before birth and during puberty. People with this condition are genetically male (one X and one Y chromosome) but do not respond to male hormones at all. As a result, they generally have normal female external genitalia and female breasts. However, they do not have a uterus or cervix so are unable to menstruate or conceive children. Other signs and symptoms may include undescended testes and sparse to absent pubic hair. Gender identity is typically female. Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome is caused by changes (mutations) in the AR gene and is inherited in an X-linked manner. Treatment and gender assignment can be a very complex issue, and must be individualized with each affected person. In general, surgery may be required to remove testes that are located in unusual places and estrogen replacement therapy can be prescribed after puberty.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal hair quantity 90% Cryptorchidism 90% Decreased fertility 90% Male pseudohermaphroditism 90% Primary amenorrhea 90% Tall stature 90% Hernia of the abdominal wall 50% Reduced bone mineral density 50% Flexion contracture 7.5% Gynecomastia 7.5% Testicular neoplasm 7.5% Tremor 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Androgen insensitivity syndrome is a condition that affects sexual development before birth and during puberty. People with this condition are genetically male, with one X chromosome and one Y chromosome in each cell. Because their bodies are unable to respond to certain male sex hormones (called androgens), they may have mostly female sex characteristics or signs of both male and female sexual development.  Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome occurs when the body cannot use androgens at all. People with this form of the condition have the external sex characteristics of females, but do not have a uterus and therefore do not menstruate and are unable to conceive a child (infertile). They are typically raised as females and have a female gender identity. Affected individuals have male internal sex organs (testes) that are undescended, which means they are abnormally located in the pelvis or abdomen. Undescended testes can become cancerous later in life if they are not surgically removed. People with complete androgen insensitivity syndrome also have sparse or absent hair in the pubic area and under the arms.  The partial and mild forms of androgen insensitivity syndrome result when the body's tissues are partially sensitive to the effects of androgens. People with partial androgen insensitivity (also called Reifenstein syndrome) can have normal female sex characteristics, both male and female sex characteristics, or normal male sex characteristics. They may be raised as males or as females, and may have a male or a female gender identity. People with mild androgen insensitivity are born with male sex characteristics, but are often infertile and tend to experience breast enlargement at puberty.
Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome affects 2 to 5 per 100,000 people who are genetically male. Partial androgen insensitivity is thought to be at least as common as complete androgen insensitivity. Mild androgen insensitivity is much less common.
Mutations in the AR gene cause androgen insensitivity syndrome. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called an androgen receptor. Androgen receptors allow cells to respond to androgens, which are hormones (such as testosterone) that direct male sexual development. Androgens and androgen receptors also have other important functions in both males and females, such as regulating hair growth and sex drive. Mutations in the AR gene prevent androgen receptors from working properly, which makes cells less responsive to androgens or prevents cells from using these hormones at all. Depending on the level of androgen insensitivity, an affected person's sex characteristics can vary from mostly female to mostly male.
This condition is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. A condition is considered X-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes in each cell. In genetic males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In genetic females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation must be present in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females.  About two-thirds of all cases of androgen insensitivity syndrome are inherited from mothers who carry an altered copy of the AR gene on one of their two X chromosomes. The remaining cases result from a new mutation that can occur in the mother's egg cell before the child is conceived or during early fetal development.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of androgen insensitivity syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Androgen resistance syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Intersex  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Reifenstein Syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care