Interstitial cystitis*painful bladder syndrome (IC/PBS) is one of several conditions that causes bladder pain and a need to urinate frequently and urgently. Some doctors have started using the term bladder pain syndrome (BPS) to describe this condition.
                
Your bladder is a balloon-shaped organ where your body holds urine. When you have a bladder problem, you may notice certain signs or symptoms.
                
*See Pronounciation Guide for tips on how to say the words in bold type.
Signs of bladder problems include
                
-  Urgency. The feeling that you need to go right now! Urgency is normal if you haven't been near a bathroom for a few hours or if you have been drinking a lot of fluids. But you may have a problem if you have strong urges before your bladder has had time to fill. All of a sudden, you feel a strong urge to go. At times, you may even have an accident because the urge strikes so quickly you don't have time to find a bathroom.    - Frequency. The feeling that you need to go much more often than anyone else. Doctors and nurses use the term void, which means to empty the bladder. Most people void between four and seven times a day. Drinking large amounts of fluid can cause more frequent voiding. Taking blood pressure medicines called diuretics, or water pills, can also cause more frequent voiding. If you void more than eight times a day, and you dont take diuretics or drink large amounts of fluid, it may be the sign of a problem.  - Pain. The feeling of more than discomfort when you need to go. Having a full bladder may be uncomfortable, but it should not be painful. You may have a problem if you feel burning or sharp pain in your bladder or urethrathe opening where urine leaves the body.
                
Some people may have pain without urgency or frequency. Others have urgency and frequency without pain.
Many different problems can cause urgency, frequency, and bladder pain. Just a few of them are
                
- infections  - bowel disorders  - endometriosistissue that normally lines the womb that appears in other places outside of the womb  - bladder cancer
                
Your doctor will ask you questions and run tests to find the cause of your bladder problems. Usually, the doctor will find that you have either an infection or an overactive bladder. But urgency, frequency, and pain are not always caused by infection.
                
Sometimes the cause is hard to find. If all the test results are normal and all other diseases are ruled out, your doctor may find that you have IC/PBS.
Both men and women can get IC/PBS, though twice as many women are affected as men. It can occur at any age, but it is most common in middle age.
                
People with IC/PBS rarely have bladder pain all the time. The pain usually comes and goes as the bladder fills and then empties. The pain may go away for weeks or months and then return. People with IC/PBS sometimes refer to an attack of bladder pain as a flare or flare-up. Stress may bring on a flare-up of symptoms in someone who has IC/PBS. But stress does not cause a person to get IC/PBS.
Finding the cause of bladder pain may require several tests.
                
While tests may aid your doctor in making a diagnosis of IC/PBS, a careful review of your symptoms and a physical exam in the office are generally the most important parts of the evaluation.
- Bladder problems have many possible causes.  - Your doctor will need to do tests to find the cause of your bladder problems. If all the test results are normal, you may have IC/PBS.  - No one treatment option for IC/PBS works for everybody.  - Treatments for IC/PBS may include changing your diet and exercising.  - Medicines for IC/PBS may be taken by mouth or put directly into the bladder through a tube by a doctor.  - Nerve stimulation helps some people with IC/PBS.  - Surgery is a last resort for treating IC/PBS.