Children's interstitial and diffuse lung disease (chILD) is not a single condition, but a group of rare lung diseases found in infants, children and adolescents that can range from mild to severe.  All types of chILD decrease a child's ability to supply oxygen to their body.  These diseases make it difficult for the lungs to exchange oxygen and carbon dioxide and can cause fluid and other materials to collect in the lungs.  Early diagnosis and treatment is important for any type of chILD.  See the Children's Interstitial Lung Disease Foundation to see a list of different ILDs and to find more information about diagnosis, treatment and help finding a specialist.
 There is no single treatment for interstitial lung diseases in children.  Different forms of chILD require different treatments and support depending on the condition. The goals of treatment for chILD is to relieve symptoms, provide support to maximize growth and development, and to prevent exposure to preventable illnesses that could make the chILD worse.  See the Children's Interstitial and Diffuse Lung Disease Foundation for more detailed information about treatment.
Researchers don't yet know all of the causes of childhood interstitial lung disease (chILD). Many times, these diseases have no clear cause.
                
Some conditions and factors that may cause or lead to chILD include:
                
Inherited conditions, such as surfactant disorders. Surfactant is a liquid that coats the inside of the lungs. It helps with breathing and may help protect the lungs from bacterial and viral infections.
                
Birth defects that cause problems with the structure or function of the lungs.
                
Aspiration (as-pih-RA-shun). This term refers to inhaling substancessuch as food, liquid, or vomitinto the lungs. Inhaling these substances can injure the lungs. Aspiration may occur in children who have swallowing problems or gastroesophageal (GAS-tro-eh-so-fa-JE-al) reflux disease (GERD). GERD occurs if acid from the stomach backs up into the throat.
                
Immune system disorders. The immune system protects the body against bacteria, viruses, and toxins. Children who have immune system disorders aren't able to fight illness and disease as well as children who have healthy immune systems.
                
Exposure to substances in the environment that can irritate the lungs, such as molds and chemicals.
                
Some cancer treatments, such as radiation and chemotherapy.
                
Systemic or autoimmune diseases, such as collagen vascular disease or inflammatory bowel disease. Systemic diseases are diseases that involve many of the body's organs. Autoimmune diseases occur if the body's immune system mistakenly attacks the body's tissues and cells.
                
A bone marrow transplant or a lung transplant.
Childhood interstitial lung disease (chILD) is rare. Most children are not at risk for chILD. However, some factors increase the risk of developing chILD. These risk factors include:
                
Having a family history of interstitial lung disease or chILD.
                
Having an inherited surfactant disorder or a family history of this type of disorder. Surfactant is a liquid that coats the inside of the lungs. It helps with breathing and may help protect the lungs from bacterial and viral infections.
                
Having problems with aspiration. This term "aspiration" refers to inhaling substancessuch as food, liquid, or vomitinto the lungs.
                
Having an immune system disorder. The immune system protects the body against bacteria, viruses, and toxins. Children who have immune system disorders aren't able to fight illness and disease as well as children who have healthy immune systems.
                
Being exposed to substances in the environment that can irritate the lungs, such as molds and chemicals.
                
Having a systemic or autoimmune disease, such as collagen vascular disease or inflammatory bowel disease. Systemic diseases are diseases that involve many of the body's organs. Autoimmune diseases occur if the body's immune system mistakenly attacks the body's tissues and cells.
                
Undergoing some cancer treatments, such as radiation and chemotherapy.
                
Having a bone marrow transplant or a lung transplant.
                
Certain types of chILD are more common in infants and young children, while others can occur in children of any age. For more information, go to "Types of Childhood Interstitial Lung Disease."
                
The risk of death seems to be higher for children who have chILD and pulmonary hypertension, developmental or growth disorders, bone marrow transplants, or certain surfactant problems.
Childhood interstitial lung disease (chILD) has many signs and symptoms because the disease has many forms. Signs and symptoms may include:
                
Fast breathing, which also is called tachypnea (tak-ip-NE-ah)
                
Labored breathing, which also is called respiratory distress
                
Low oxygen levels in the blood, which also is called hypoxemia (hi-POK-se-ah)
                
Recurrent coughing, wheezing, or crackling sounds in the chest
                
Shortness of breath during exercise (in older children) or while eating (in infants), which also is called dyspnea (disp-NE-ah)
                
Poor growth or failure to gain weight
                
Recurrent pneumonia or bronchiolitis
                
If your child has any of these signs and symptoms, contact his or her doctor. The doctor may refer you to a pediatric pulmonologist. This is a doctor who specializes in diagnosing and treating children who have lung diseases and conditions.
At this time, most types of childhood interstitial lung disease (chILD) can't be prevented. People who have a family history of inherited (genetic) interstitial lung disease may want to consider genetic counseling. A counselor can explain the risk of children inheriting chILD.
                
You and your child can take steps to help prevent infections and other illnesses that worsen chILD and its symptoms. For example:
                
Make hand washing a family habit to avoid germs and prevent illnesses.
                
Try to keep your child away from people who are sick. Even a common cold can cause problems for someone who has chILD.
                
Talk with your child's doctor about vaccines that your child needs, such as an annual flu shot. Make sure everyone in your household gets all of the vaccines that their doctors recommend.
                
Talk with your child's doctor about how to prevent your child from getting respiratory syncytial (sin-SIT-e-al) virus. This common virus leads to cold and flu symptoms for most people. However, it can make children who have lung diseases very sick.
                
Avoid exposing your child to air pollution, tobacco smoke, and other substances that can irritate his or her lungs. Strongly advise your child not to smoke now or in the future.