Hereditary fructose intolerance (HFI) is a metabolic disease caused by the absence of an enzyme called aldolase B. In people with HFI, ingestion of fructose (fruit sugar) and sucrose (cane or beet sugar, table sugar) causes severe hypoglycemia (low blood sugar) and the build up of dangerous substances in the liver. HFI may be relatively mild or a very severe disease. The condition is caused by mutations in the ALDOB gene. It is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Treatment involves eliminating fructose and sucrose from the diet. In the severe form, eliminating these sugars from the diet may not prevent progressive liver disease.
The symptoms of HFI include: Poor feeding as a baby Irritability Increased or prolonged neonatal jaundice Vomiting Convulsions Excessive sleepiness Intolerance for fruits Avoidance of fruits and fructose/sucrose-containing foods Doing well after eating foods without fructose/sucrose The early symptoms of fructose intolerance may resemble those of galactosemia: irritability, jaundice, vomiting, convulsions and an enlarged liver and spleen. Later problems relate more to liver disease. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hereditary fructose intolerance. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abdominal pain - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Bicarbonaturia - Cirrhosis - Coma - Elevated hepatic transaminases - Failure to thrive - Fructose intolerance - Gastrointestinal hemorrhage - Glycosuria - Hepatic steatosis - Hepatomegaly - Hyperbilirubinemia - Hyperphosphaturia - Hyperuricemia - Hyperuricosuria - Hypoglycemia - Hypophosphatemia - Intellectual disability - Jaundice - Lactic acidosis - Lethargy - Malnutrition - Metabolic acidosis - Nausea - Proximal renal tubular acidosis - Proximal tubulopathy - Seizures - Transient aminoaciduria - Vomiting - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
is caused by alterations (mutations) in the ALDOB gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called aldolase B. This enzyme is primarily found in the liver and is involved in the breakdown of fructose into energy. Mutations in the ALDOB gene reduce the function of the enzyme, impairing its ability to metabolize fructose. This causes a toxic buildup of fructose-1-phosphate in liver cells, which results in the death of liver cells over time.
 HFI is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner, which means alterations (mutations) are present in both copies of the ALDOB gene. The parents of an individual with HFI each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typicaly do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
 Complete elimination of fructose and sucrose from the diet is an effective treatment for most people, although this can be challenging. More information on treatment for HFI is available from the HFI Laboratory at Boston University at the following link. This page includes information on what people with HFI can and cannot eat. http://www.bu.edu/aldolase/HFI/treatment/ Additional information on foods to avoid if you have HFI is available from the Mayo clinic. http://www.mayoclinic.com/health/fructose-intolerance/AN01574
Hereditary fructose intolerance is a condition that affects a person's ability to digest the sugar fructose. Fructose is a simple sugar found primarily in fruits. Affected individuals develop signs and symptoms of the disorder in infancy when fruits, juices, or other foods containing fructose are introduced into the diet. After ingesting fructose, individuals with hereditary fructose intolerance may experience nausea, bloating, abdominal pain, diarrhea, vomiting, and low blood sugar (hypoglycemia). Affected infants may fail to grow and gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive).  Repeated ingestion of fructose-containing foods can lead to liver and kidney damage. The liver damage can result in a yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice), an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly), and chronic liver disease (cirrhosis). Continued exposure to fructose may result in seizures, coma, and ultimately death from liver and kidney failure. Due to the severity of symptoms experienced when fructose is ingested, most people with hereditary fructose intolerance develop a dislike for fruits, juices, and other foods containing fructose.  Hereditary fructose intolerance should not be confused with a condition called fructose malabsorption. In people with fructose malabsorption, the cells of the intestine cannot absorb fructose normally, leading to bloating, diarrhea or constipation, flatulence, and stomach pain. Fructose malabsorption is thought to affect approximately 40 percent of individuals in the Western hemisphere; its cause is unknown.
The incidence of hereditary fructose intolerance is estimated to be 1 in 20,000 to 30,000 individuals each year worldwide.
Mutations in the ALDOB gene cause hereditary fructose intolerance. The ALDOB gene provides instructions for making the aldolase B enzyme. This enzyme is found primarily in the liver and is involved in the breakdown (metabolism) of fructose so this sugar can be used as energy. Aldolase B is responsible for the second step in the metabolism of fructose, which breaks down the molecule fructose-1-phosphate into other molecules called glyceraldehyde and dihydroxyacetone phosphate.  ALDOB gene mutations reduce the function of the enzyme, impairing its ability to metabolize fructose. A lack of functional aldolase B results in an accumulation of fructose-1-phosphate in liver cells. This buildup is toxic, resulting in the death of liver cells over time. Additionally, the breakdown products of fructose-1-phosphase are needed in the body to produce energy and to maintain blood sugar levels. The combination of decreased cellular energy, low blood sugar, and liver cell death leads to the features of hereditary fructose intolerance.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of hereditary fructose intolerance:  - Boston University: Specifics of Hereditary Fructose Intolerance and Its Diagnosis  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Hereditary Fructose Intolerance  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary fructosuria  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hereditary Fructose Intolerance   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care