Dextrocardia with situs inversus is a condition that is characterized by abnormal positioning of the heart and other internal organs. In people affected by dextrocardia, the tip of the heart points towards the right side of the chest instead of the left side. Situs inversus refers to the mirror-image reversal of the organs in the chest and abdominal cavity. Some affected people have no obvious signs or symptoms. However, a small percentage of people also have congenital heart defects, usually transposition of the great vessels. Dextrocardia with situs inversus can also be associated with primary ciliary dyskinesia (also known as Kartagener syndrome). Treatment typically depends on the heart or physical problems the person may have in addition to dextrocardia with situs inversus.
 The exact cause of dextrocardia with situs inversus is not known, but the condition results from the abnormal positioning of the internal organs during fetal development. More than 60 known genes are important for the proper positioning and patterning of the organs in the body. However, a specific genetic cause of dextrocardia with situs inversus has not been identified and inheritance patterns have not been confirmed in most cases. Some people have dextrocardia with situs inversus as part of an underlying condition called primary ciliary dyskinesia. Primary ciliary dyskinesia can result from changes (mutations) in several different genes, including the DNAI1 and DNAH5 gene; however, the genetic cause is unknown in many families.
 In most cases of dextrocardia with situs inversus, a specific genetic cause has not been identified and inheritance patterns have not been confirmed. However, approximately 25% of affected people have primary ciliary dyskinesia, which is typically inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that to be affected, a person must have a mutation in both copies of the responsible gene in each cell. The parents of an affected person usually each carry one mutated copy of the gene and are referred to as carriers. Carriers typically do not show signs or symptoms of the condition. When two carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be a carrier like each of the parents, and a 25% chance to not have the condition and not be a carrier.
 In some cases, a diagnosis of dextrocardia with situs inversus is suspected based on the presence of concerning signs and symptoms; however, it is often discovered by chance when an x-ray or ultrasound is performed to investigate a different condition. Computed tomography (CT) scanning is typically the preferred examination to confirm the diagnosis of dextrocardia with situs inversus. Magnetic resonance imaging may be substituted in cases that are associated with congenital heart defects.
 Treatment typically depends on the heart or physical problems the person may have in addition to dextrocardia with situs inversus. For example, infants born with congenital heart defects or other organ malformations may require surgery. The management of people affected by Kartagener syndrome typically includes measures to enhance clearance of mucus, prevent respiratory infections, and treat bacterial infections. GeneReviews offers more specific information on the treatment of Kartagener syndrome and other types of primary ciliary dyskinesia. Please click on the link to access this resource.
Situs inversus is a condition in which the arrangement of the internal organs is a mirror image of normal anatomy. It can occur alone (isolated, with no other abnormalities or conditions) or it can occur as part of a syndrome with various other defects. Congenital heart defects are present in about 5-10% of affected people. The underlying cause and genetics of situs inversus are complex. Familial cases have been reported.
 In isolated situs inversus (occurring alone with no other abnormalities), there is a complete mirror image transposition of the thoracic (chest) and abdominal organs, and anterior-posterior (front-back) symmetry is normal. Many affected people have no associated health issues when the condition is isolated. When situs inversus occurs in association with other conditions such as Kartagener syndrome or primary ciliary dyskinesia, additional signs and symptoms relating to these conditions will be present.
 The genetics of situs inversus is complex. Several familial cases have been reported in which the inheritance has been described as either autosomal recessive (most commonly), autosomal dominant, or X-linked. The condition appears to be genetically heterogeneous, meaning that different genetic factors or genes may cause the condition among different people or families. If situs inversus is associated with another underlying syndrome or condition, the inheritance pattern may be the same as that of the underlying condition. People with questions about genetic risks to themselves or family members are encouraged to speak with a genetics professional.
 A thorough physical examination, followed by radiographic imaging of the chest and abdomen and electrocardiography, identify most cases of situs inversus. The main diagnostic challenge in affected people is the non-traditional presence of referred pain (pain felt in a different location than its source).
 In isolated situs inversus, no treatment may be necessary. When situs inversus is associated with another condition, treatment may depend on the associated condition and the signs and symptoms present in the affected person. Knowing that a person has situs inversus is important for diagnosing medical problems and preventing surgical mishaps that can result from the failure to recognize reversed anatomy. For example, in a person with situs inversus, appendicitis causes pain in the left lower abdomen instead of the right lower abdomen. Wearing medical identification can help ensure proper treatment in an emergency medical situation.