Isovaleric acidemia (IVA) is a type of organic acid disorder in which affected individuals have problems breaking down an amino acid called leucine from the food they eat. Signs and symptoms may range from very mild to life-threatening. In severe cases, symptoms begin within a few days of birth and include poor feeding, vomiting, seizures, and lack of energy (lethargy); these may progress to more serious medical problems including seizures, coma, and possibly death. In other cases, signs and symptoms appear during childhood and may come and go over time. A characteristic sign of IVA is a distinctive odor of sweaty feet during acute illness. Other features may include failure to thrive or delayed development. IVA is caused by mutations in the IVD gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment involves moderate restriction of proteins in the diet and oral administration of glycine and L-carnitine which helps to rid the body of excess isovaleric acid.
 Isovaleric acidemia is caused by mutations in the IVD gene. The IVD gene provides instructions for making an enzyme that plays an essential role in breaking down proteins from the diet. Specifically, this enzyme helps process the amino acid leucine, which is part of many proteins. If a mutation in the IVD gene reduces or eliminates the activity of this enzyme, the body is unable to break down leucine properly. As a result, an organic acid called isovaleric acid and related compounds build up to harmful levels in the body. This buildup damages the brain and nervous system, causing serious health problems.
How  Isovaleric acidemia is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
 There is currently no cure for isovaleric acidemia (IVA). Upon diagnosis, immediate treatment is typically necessary in order to prevent metabolic crises and complications that may follow. It is often recommended that affected individuals have a low-leucine / low-protein diet and use medical foods (such as special low-protein flours, pastas, and rice that are made especially for people with organic acid disorders) and leucine-free medical formula. A dietician with knowledge of IVA can help parents create a food plan that contains the right amount of protein, nutrients, and energy to keep the child healthy. Any diet changes should be under the guidance of a dietician. Medications that may be recommended include glycine and L-carnitine, which help rid the body of unwanted isovaleric acid and other harmful substances. No medication or supplement should be used without checking with a metabolic doctor. Children with symptoms of a metabolic crisis need medical treatment right away and may be given bicarbonate, glucose, and other medications by IV. With prompt and careful treatment, children with IVA have a good chance to live healthy lives with normal growth and development. However, some children, even when treated, may have repeated metabolic crises which can lead to life-long learning problems or mental retardation.
Isovaleric acidemia is a rare disorder in which the body is unable to process certain proteins properly. It is classified as an organic acid disorder, which is a condition that leads to an abnormal buildup of particular acids known as organic acids. Abnormal levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), and tissues can be toxic and can cause serious health problems.  Normally, the body breaks down proteins from food into smaller parts called amino acids. Amino acids can be further processed to provide energy for growth and development. People with isovaleric acidemia have inadequate levels of an enzyme that helps break down a particular amino acid called leucine.  Health problems related to isovaleric acidemia range from very mild to life-threatening. In severe cases, the features of isovaleric acidemia become apparent within a few days after birth. The initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, seizures, and lack of energy (lethargy). These symptoms sometimes progress to more serious medical problems, including seizures, coma, and possibly death. A characteristic sign of isovaleric acidemia is a distinctive odor of sweaty feet during acute illness. This odor is caused by the buildup of a compound called isovaleric acid in affected individuals.  In other cases, the signs and symptoms of isovaleric acidemia appear during childhood and may come and go over time. Children with this condition may fail to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive) and often have delayed development. In these children, episodes of more serious health problems can be triggered by prolonged periods without food (fasting), infections, or eating an increased amount of protein-rich foods.  Some people with gene mutations that cause isovaleric acidemia are asymptomatic, which means they never experience any signs or symptoms of the condition.
Isovaleric acidemia is estimated to affect at least 1 in 250,000 people in the United States.
Mutations in the IVD gene cause isovaleric acidemia.  The IVD gene provides instructions for making an enzyme that plays an essential role in breaking down proteins from the diet. Specifically, this enzyme helps process the amino acid leucine, which is part of many proteins. If a mutation in the IVD gene reduces or eliminates the activity of this enzyme, the body is unable to break down leucine properly. As a result, an organic acid called isovaleric acid and related compounds build up to harmful levels in the body. This buildup damages the brain and nervous system, causing serious health problems.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of isovaleric acidemia:  - Baby's First Test  - Genetic Testing Registry: Isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care