 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Joubert syndrome 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal renal physiology - Abnormality of saccadic eye movements - Abnormality of the corpus callosum - Abnormality of the foot - Agenesis of cerebellar vermis - Ataxia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Brainstem dysplasia - Central apnea - Chorioretinal coloboma - Depressed nasal bridge - Dolichocephaly - Dysgenesis of the cerebellar vermis - Elongated superior cerebellar peduncle - Encephalocele - Enlarged fossa interpeduncularis - Episodic tachypnea - Esotropia - Failure to thrive - Frontal bossing - Heterogeneous - High palate - Hydrocephalus - Hypertelorism - Hypoplasia of the brainstem - Hypoplastic male external genitalia - Impaired smooth pursuit - Intellectual disability - Low-set ears - Macrocephaly - Microphthalmia - Molar tooth sign on MRI - Muscular hypotonia - Neonatal breathing dysregulation - Nephronophthisis - Nystagmus - Oculomotor apraxia - Optic nerve coloboma - Phenotypic variability - Postaxial hand polydactyly - Renal cyst - Retinal dystrophy - Thickened superior cerebellar peduncle - Visual impairment - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Joubert syndrome is disorder of abnormal brain development that may affect many parts of the body. It is characterized by the absence or underdevelopment of the cerebellar vermis (a part of the brain that controls balance and coordination) and a malformed brain stem (connection between the brain and spinal cord). This gives a characteristic appearance of a molar tooth sign on MRI. Signs and symptoms can vary but commonly include weak muscle tone (hypotonia); abnormal breathing patterns; abnormal eye movements; ataxia; distinctive facial features; and intellectual disability. Various other abnormalities may also be present. Joubert syndrome may be caused by mutations in any of many genes and is predominantly inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Rarely it may be inherited in an X-linked recessive manner. Treatment is supportive and depends on the symptoms in each person.
 Joubert syndrome and related disorders may be caused by changes (mutations) in any of many genes (some of which are unknown). The proteins made from these genes are either known, or thought, to affect cell structures called cilia. Cilia are projections on the cell surface that play a role in signaling. They are important for many cell types, including neurons, liver cells and kidney cells. Cilia also play a role in the senses such as sight, hearing, and smell. Mutations in the genes responsible for Joubert syndrome and related disorders cause problems with the structure and function of cilia, likely disrupting important signaling pathways during development. However, it is still unclear how specific developmental abnormalities result from these problems.
How  Joubert syndrome is predominantly inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that to be affected, a person must have a mutation in both copies of the responsible gene in each cell. Affected people inherit one mutated copy of the gene from each parent, who is referred to as a carrier. Carriers of an autosomal recessive condition typically do not have any signs or symptoms (they are unaffected). When 2 carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a: 25% (1 in 4) chance to be affected 50% (1 in 2) chance to be an unaffected carrier like each parent 25% chance to be unaffected and not be a carrier. In rare cases, when Joubert syndrome is caused by mutations in the OFD1 gene on the X chromosome, it is inherited in an X-linked recessive manner. X-linked recessive conditions usually occur in males, who only have one X chromosome (and one Y chromosome). Females have two X chromosomes, so if they have a mutation on one X chromosome, they still have a working copy of the gene on their other X chromosome and are typically unaffected. While females can have an X-linked recessive condition, it is very rare. If a mother is a carrier of an X-linked recessive condition and the father is not, the risk to children depends on each child's sex. Each male child has a 50% chance to be unaffected, and a 50% chance to be affected Each daughter has a 50% chance to be unaffected, and a 50% chance to be an unaffected carrier If a father has the condition and the mother is not a carrier, all sons will be unaffected, and all daughters will be unaffected carriers.
Joubert syndrome is a rare brain malformation characterized by the absence or underdevelopment of the cerebellar vermis- an area of the brain that controls balance and coordination -- as well as a malformed brain stem (molar tooth sign). The most common features of Joubert syndrome in infants include abnormally rapid breathing (hyperpnea), decreased muscle tone (hypotonia), abnormal eye movements, impaired intellectual development, and the inability to coordinate voluntary muscle movements (ataxia). Physical deformities may be present, such as extra fingers and toes (polydactyly), cleft lip or palate, and tongue abnormalities. Kidney and liver abnormalities can develop, and seizures may also occur. Many cases of Joubert syndrome appear to be sporadic (not inherited). In most other cases, Joubert syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner (meaning both parents must have a copy of the mutation) via mutation in at least 10 different genes, including NPHP1, AHI1, and CEP290.
Treatment for Joubert syndrome is symptomatic and supportive. Infant stimulation and physical, occupational, and speech therapy may benefit some children. Infants with abnormal breathing patterns should be monitored. Screening for progressive eye, liver, and kidney complications associated with Joubert-related disorders should be performed on a regular basis.
The prognosis for infants with Joubert syndrome depends on whether or not the cerebellar vermis is partially developed or entirely absent, as well as on the extent and severity of other organ involvement, such as the kidneys and liver. Some children have a mild form of the disorder, with minimal motor disability and good mental development, while others may have severe motor disability, moderate impaired mental development, and multi-organ impairments.
The NINDS supports research on the development of the nervous system and the cerebellum. This research is critical for increasing our understanding of Joubert syndrome, and for developing methods of treatment and prevention. NINDS, in conjunction with the NIH Office of Rare Disorders, sponsored a symposium on Joubert syndrome in 2002. Research priorities for the disorder were outlined at this meeting.
Joubert syndrome is estimated to affect between 1 in 80,000 and 1 in 100,000 newborns. However, this estimate may be too low because Joubert syndrome has such a large range of possible features and is likely underdiagnosed.
Joubert syndrome and related disorders can be caused by mutations in at least 10 genes. The proteins produced from these genes are known or suspected to play roles in cell structures called cilia. Cilia are microscopic, finger-like projections that stick out from the surface of cells and are involved in chemical signaling. Cilia are important for the structure and function of many types of cells, including brain cells (neurons) and certain cells in the kidneys and liver. Cilia are also necessary for the perception of sensory input (such as sight, hearing, and smell).  Mutations in the genes associated with Joubert syndrome and related disorders lead to problems with the structure and function of cilia. Defects in these cell structures probably disrupt important chemical signaling pathways during development. Although researchers believe that defective cilia are responsible for most of the features of these disorders, it remains unclear how they lead to specific developmental abnormalities.  Mutations in the 10 genes known to be associated with Joubert syndrome and related disorders only account for about half of all cases of these conditions. In the remaining cases, the genetic cause is unknown.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Joubert syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Joubert Syndrome and Related Disorders  - Genetic Testing Registry: Familial aplasia of the vermis  - Genetic Testing Registry: Joubert syndrome 10  - Genetic Testing Registry: Joubert syndrome 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Joubert syndrome 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Joubert syndrome 4  - Genetic Testing Registry: Joubert syndrome 5  - Genetic Testing Registry: Joubert syndrome 6  - Genetic Testing Registry: Joubert syndrome 7  - Genetic Testing Registry: Joubert syndrome 8  - Genetic Testing Registry: Joubert syndrome 9   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care