Kawasaki disease is a rare childhood disease. It makes the walls of the blood vessels in the body become inflamed. It can affect any type of blood vessel, including the arteries, veins, and capillaries.    No one knows what causes Kawasaki disease. Symptoms include       -  High fever that lasts longer than 5 days    - Swollen lymph nodes in the neck    - A rash on the mid-section and genital area    - Red, dry, cracked lips and a red, swollen tongue    - Red, swollen palms of the hands and soles of the feet    - Redness of the eyes        Kawasaki disease can't be passed from one child to another. There is no single test. To diagnose it, doctors look at the signs and symptoms. They may also use an echocardiogram or other tests. It is mainly treated with medicines. Rarely, medical procedures and surgery also may be used for children whose coronary arteries are affected.     Kawasaki disease can't be prevented. However, most children who develop the disease fully recover - usually within weeks of getting signs and symptoms. Further problems are rare.    NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
Kawasaki syndrome is a condition that involves inflammation of the blood vessels. It is typically diagnosed in young children, but older children and adults can also develop this condition. Kawasaki syndrome often begins with a fever that lasts at least 5 days. Other classic symptoms may include red eyes, lips, and mouth; rash; swollen and red hands and feet; and swollen lymph nodes. Sometimes the condition affects the coronary arteries (which carry oxygen-rich blood to the heart). This can lead to serious heart problems. Kawasaki syndrome occurs most often in people of Asian and Pacific Island descent. The cause of Kawasaki disease is unknown. An infection along with genetic factors may be involved. Treatment includes intravenous gamma globulin and high doses of aspirin in a hospital setting.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Kawasaki syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Cheilitis 90% Glossitis 90% Inflammatory abnormality of the eye 90% Lymphadenopathy 90% Proteinuria 90% Recurrent pharyngitis 90% Skin rash 90% Vasculitis 90% Abdominal pain 50% Abnormality of nail color 50% Abnormality of temperature regulation 50% Abnormality of the heart valves 50% Abnormality of the pericardium 50% Arthritis 50% Diarrhea 50% Dry skin 50% Edema 50% Leukocytosis 50% Abnormality of the myocardium 7.5% Arrhythmia 7.5% Arthralgia 7.5% Aseptic leukocyturia 7.5% Behavioral abnormality 7.5% Biliary tract abnormality 7.5% Congestive heart failure 7.5% Coronary artery disease 7.5% Cranial nerve paralysis 7.5% Dilatation of the ascending aorta 7.5% Meningitis 7.5% Migraine 7.5% Nausea and vomiting 7.5% Ptosis 7.5% Restrictive lung disease 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 A variation in the ITPKC gene has been associated with an increased risk of developing Kawasaki syndrome. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate 3-kinase C. This enzyme helps limit the activity of immune system cells called T cells, which identify foreign substances and defend the body against infection. Reducing the activity of T cells when appropriate prevents the overproduction of immune proteins called cytokines that lead to inflammation and can, when present in large quantities, can cause tissue damage. Researchers believe that variations in the ITPKC gene may interfere with the body's ability to reduce T cell activity, leading to inflammation that damages blood vessels and results in the symptoms of this disease. It is likely that other factors, including changes in additional genes, also influence the development of this complex disorder.  The cause of Kawasaki syndrome isn't known. The body's response to a virus or infection combined with genetic factors may cause the disease. However, no specific virus or infection has been found, and the role of genetics is not well understood. Kawasaki syndrome is not contagious; it can't be passed from one child to another.
 A predisposition to Kawasaki syndrome appears to be passed through generations in families, but the inheritance pattern is unknown.
 Intravenous gamma globulin is the standard treatment for Kawasaki disease and is administered in high doses. Children with Kawasaki disease usually greatly improve within 24 hours of treatment with IV gamma globulin. Aspirin is often given in combination with the IV gamma globulin as part of the treatment plan. We found limited information on the management of Kawasaki disease specifically in adults, however you may find the following articles to be helpful: Dauphin C. et al., Kawasaki disease is also a disease of adults: report of six cases. Arch Mal Coeur Vaiss [serial online]. 2007;100(5):439-447. Sve P, Stankovic K, Smail A, Durand DV, Marchand G, and Broussolle C. Adult Kawasaki disease: report of two cases and literature review. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2005;34(6):785-792. Sve P, Bui-Xuan C, Charhon A, and Broussolle C. Adult Kawasaki disease. Rev Med Interne [serial online]. 2003;24(9):577-584.In the article listed above by Dauphin C. et al. the authors describe that of the five adult patients with Kawasaki disease who were treated, all progressed favorably after a course of immunoglobulins.  In addition, in the article by Sve P. et al., the authors comment that 'although adult KD often was diagnosed after the acute phase, when a significant beneficial effect from gammaglobulin infusion could not be expected, this treatment did appear to shorten the course of the disease.'
The cause of Kawasaki disease isn't known. The body's response to a virus or infection combined with genetic factors may cause the disease. However, no specific virus or infection has been found, and the role of genetics isn't known.
                
Kawasaki disease can't be passed from one child to another. Your child won't get it from close contact with a child who has the disease. Also, if your child has the disease, he or she can't pass it to another child.
Kawasaki disease affects children of all races and ages and both genders. It occurs most often in children of Asian and Pacific Island descent.
                
The disease is more likely to affect boys than girls. Most cases occur in children younger than 5 years old. Kawasaki disease is rare in children older than 8.
Major Signs and Symptoms
                
One of the main symptoms during the early part of Kawasaki disease, called the acute phase, is fever. The fever lasts longer than 5 days. It remains high even after treatment with standard childhood fever medicines.
                
Other classic signs of the disease are:
                
Swollen lymph nodes in the neck
                
A rash on the mid-section of the body and in the genital area
                
Red, dry, cracked lips and a red, swollen tongue
                
Red, swollen palms of the hands and soles of the feet
                
Redness of the eyes
                
Other Signs and Symptoms
                
During the acute phase, your child also may be irritable and have a sore throat, joint pain, diarrhea, vomiting, and stomach pain.
                
Within 2 to 3 weeks of the start of symptoms, the skin on your child's fingers and toes may peel, sometimes in large sheets.
Kawasaki disease can't be prevented. However, most children who have the disease recoverusually within weeks of getting signs and symptoms. Further problems are rare.
Kawasaki disease is a sudden and time-limited (acute) illness that affects infants and young children. Affected children develop a prolonged fever lasting several days, a skin rash, and swollen lymph nodes in the neck (cervical lymphadenopathy). They also develop redness in the whites of the eyes (conjunctivitis) and redness (erythema) of the lips, lining of the mouth (oral mucosa), tongue, palms of the hands, and soles of the feet.  Without treatment, 15 to 25 percent of individuals with Kawasaki disease develop bulging and thinning of the walls of the arteries that supply blood to the heart muscle (coronary artery aneurysms) or other damage to the coronary arteries, which can be life-threatening.
In the United States and other Western countries, Kawasaki disease occurs in approximately 1 in 10,000 children under 5 each year. The condition is 10 to 20 times more common in East Asia, including Japan, Korea, and Taiwan.
The causes of Kawasaki disease are not well understood. The disorder is generally regarded as being the result of an abnormal immune system activation, but the triggers of this abnormal response are unknown. Because cases of the disorder tend to cluster geographically and by season, researchers have suggested that an infection may be involved. However, no infectious agent (such as a virus or bacteria) has been identified.  A variation in the ITPKC gene has been associated with an increased risk of Kawasaki disease. The ITPKC gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate 3-kinase C. This enzyme helps limit the activity of immune system cells called T cells. T cells identify foreign substances and defend the body against infection. Reducing the activity of T cells when appropriate prevents the overproduction of immune proteins called cytokines that lead to inflammation and which, in excess, cause tissue damage. Researchers suggest that the ITPKC gene variation may interfere with the body's ability to reduce T cell activity, leading to inflammation that damages blood vessels and results in the signs and symptoms of Kawasaki disease.  It appears likely that other factors, including changes in other genes, also influence the development of this complex disorder.
A predisposition to Kawasaki disease appears to be passed through generations in families, but the inheritance pattern is unknown. Children of parents who have had Kawasaki disease have twice the risk of developing the disorder compared to the general population. Children with affected siblings have a tenfold higher risk.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Kawasaki disease:  - Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center  - Genetic Testing Registry: Acute febrile mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome  - National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: How is Kawasaki Disease Treated?   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care