KBG syndrome is a rare condition characterized mainly by skeletal abnormalities, distinctive facial features, and intellectual disability. Specific signs and symptoms may include delayed bone age; abnormalities of the bones of the spine, ribs, and/or hands; large teeth (macrodontia); short stature; developmental delay; and behavioral or emotional issues. Less common features may include hearing loss, seizures, and congenital heart defects. In some cases, KBG syndrome is caused by a mutation in the ANKRD11 gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. In other cases, the genetic cause is unclear. Some affected people inherit the condition from a parent, while in other people it occurs sporadically.
KBG syndrome is a rare disorder that has been reported in around 60 individuals. For unknown reasons, males are affected more often than females. Doctors think the disorder is underdiagnosed because the signs and symptoms can be mild and may be attributed to other disorders.
KBG syndrome is caused by mutations in the ANKRD11 gene. The protein produced from this gene enables other proteins to interact with each other and helps control gene activity. The ANKRD11 protein is found in nerve cells (neurons) in the brain. It plays a role in the proper development of the brain and may be involved in the ability of neurons to change and adapt over time (plasticity), which is important for learning and memory. ANKRD11 may function in other cells in the body and appears to be involved in normal bone development.  Most of the ANKRD11 gene mutations involved in KBG syndrome lead to an abnormally short ANKRD11 protein, which likely has little or no function. Reduction of this protein's function is thought to underlie the signs and symptoms of the condition. Because ANKRD11 is thought to play an important role in neurons and brain development, researchers speculate that a partial loss of its function may lead to developmental delay and intellectual disability in KBG syndrome. However, the mechanism is not fully known. It is also unclear how loss of ANKRD11 function leads to the skeletal features of the condition.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of KBG syndrome:  - Genetic Testing Registry: KBG syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care