A kidney stone is a solid piece of material that forms in the kidney from substances in the urine. It may be as small as a grain of sand or as large as a pearl. Most kidney stones pass out of the body without help from a doctor. But sometimes a stone will not go away. It may get stuck in the urinary tract, block the flow of urine and cause great pain.     The following may be signs of kidney stones that need a doctor's help:       -  Extreme pain in your back or side that will not go away    -  Blood in your urine    -  Fever and chills    -  Vomiting    -  Urine that smells bad or looks cloudy    -  A burning feeling when you urinate       Your doctor will diagnose a kidney stone with urine, blood, and imaging tests.    If you have a stone that won't pass on its own, you may need treatment. It can be done with shock waves; with a scope inserted through the tube that carries urine out of the body, called the urethra; or with surgery.    NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
A kidney stone is a solid piece of material that forms in a kidney when substances that are normally found in the urine become highly concentrated. A stone may stay in the kidney or travel down the urinary tract. Kidney stones vary in size. A small stone may pass out of the body causing little or no pain. A larger stone may get stuck along the urinary tract and can block the flow of urine, causing severe pain or blood that can be seen in the urine.
Kidney stones can form when substances in the urinesuch as calcium, magnesium, oxalate, and phosphorousbecome highly concentrated due to one or more causes:
                
- Defects in the urinary tract may block the flow of urine and create pools of urine. In stagnant urine, stone-forming substances tend to settle together into stones. Up to one-third of children who have stones have an anatomic abnormality in their urinary tract.  - Kidney stones may have a genetic cause. In other words, the tendency to form stones can run in families due to inherited factors.  - An unhealthy lifestyle may make children more likely to have kidney stones. For example, drinking too little water or drinking the wrong types of fluids, such as soft drinks or drinks with caffeine, may cause substances in the urine to become too concentrated. Similarly, too much sodium, or salt, in the diet may contribute to more chemicals in the urine, causing an increase in stone formation. Some doctors believe increases in obesity rates, less active lifestyles, and diets higher in salt may be causing more children to have kidney stones.  - Sometimes, a urinary tract infection can cause kidney stones to form. Some types of bacteria in the urinary tract break down ureaa waste product removed from the blood by the kidneysinto substances that form stones.  - Some children have metabolic disorders that lead to kidney stones. Metabolism is the way the body uses digested food for energy, including the process of breaking down food, using foods nutrients in the body, and removing the wastes that remain. The most common metabolic disorder that causes kidney stones in children is hypercalciuria, which causes extra calcium to collect in the urine. Other more rare metabolic conditions involve problems breaking down oxalate, a substance made in the body and found in some foods. These conditions include hyperoxaluria, too much oxalate in the urine, and oxalosis, characterized by deposits of oxalate and calcium in the bodys tissues. Another rare metabolic condition called cystinuria can cause kidney stones. Cystinuria is an excess of the amino acid cystine in the urine. Amino acids are the building blocks of proteins.
Children with kidney stones may have pain while urinating, see blood in the urine, or feel a sharp pain in the back or lower abdomen. The pain may last for a short or long time. Children may experience nausea and vomiting with the pain. However, children who have small stones that pass easily through the urinary tract may not have symptoms at all.
The treatment for a kidney stone usually depends on its size and what it is made of, as well as whether it is causing symptoms of pain or obstructing the urinary tract. Small stones usually pass through the urinary tract without treatment. Still, children will often require pain control and encouragement to drink lots of fluids to help move the stone along. Pain control may consist of oral or intravenous (IV) medication, depending on the duration and severity of the pain. IV fluids may be needed if the child becomes dehydrated from vomiting or an inability to drink. A child with a larger stone, or one that blocks urine flow and causes great pain, may need to be hospitalized for more urgent treatment. Hospital treatments may include the following:
To prevent kidney stones, health care providers and their patients must understand what is causing the stones to form. Especially in children with suspected metabolic abnormalities or with recurrent stones, a 24-hour urine collection is obtained to measure daily urine volume and to determine if any underlying mineral abnormality is making a child more likely to form stones. Based on the analysis of the collected urine, the treatment can be individualized to address a metabolic problem.
                
In all circumstances, children should drink plenty of fluids to keep the urine diluted and flush away substances that could form kidney stones. Urine should be almost clear.
Families may benefit from meeting with a dietitian to learn how dietary management can help in preventing stones. Depending on the underlying cause of the stone formation, medications may be necessary to prevent recurrent stones. Dietary changes and medications may be required for a long term or, quite often, for life. Some common changes include the following:
                
- Children who tend to make calcium oxalate stones or have hypercalciuria should eat a regular amount of dietary calcium and limit salt intake. A thiazide diuretic medication may be given to some children to reduce the amount of calcium leaking into the urine.  - Children who have large amounts of oxalate in the urine may need to limit foods high in oxalate, such as chocolate, peanut butter, and dark-colored soft drinks.  - Children who form uric acid or cystine stones may need extra potassium citrate or potassium carbonate in the form of a pill or liquid medication. Avoiding foods high in purinessuch as meat, fish, and shellfishmay also help prevent uric acid stones.
A kidney* stone is a solid piece of material that forms in a kidney when there are high levels of certain substances in the urine. These substances are normally found in the urine and do not cause problems at lower levels.
                
A stone may stay in the kidney or travel down the urinary tract. Kidney stones vary in size. A small stone may pass on its own, causing little or no pain. A larger stone may get stuck along the urinary tract. A stone that gets stuck can block the flow of urine, causing severe pain or bleeding.
                
*See the Pronunciation Guide for tips on how to say the words in bold.
Kidney stones are caused by high levels of calcium, oxalate, and phosphorus in the urine. Some foods may cause kidney stones in certain people. You may be more likely to get a kidney stone if you have
                
- a condition that affects levels of substances in your urine that can cause stones to form  - a family history of kidney stones  - repeating, or recurrent, urinary tract infections  - blockage of your urinary tract  - digestive problems
                
You may also be more likely to get a kidney stone if you dont drink enough fluids or if you take certain medicines.
You may have a kidney stone if you
                
- have pain while urinating  - see blood in your urine  - feel a sharp pain in your back or lower abdomenthe area between your chest and hips
                
The pain may last for a short or long time. You may have nausea and vomiting with the pain.
                
If you have a small stone that passes on its own easily, you may not have symptoms at all.
To diagnose kidney stones, your doctor will do a physical exam and ask about your medical history. The doctor may ask if you have a family history of kidney stones and about your diet, digestive problems, and other health problems. The doctor may perform urine, blood, and imaging tests to complete the diagnosis.
                
- Urine tests can show whether you have an infection or your urine contains substances that form stones.  - Blood tests can show problems that lead to kidney stones.  - Imaging tests are used to find the location of kidney stones in your body. The tests may also be able to show problems that caused a kidney stone to form.
The treatment for kidney stones usually depends on their size and what they are made of. Kidney stones may be treated by your regular doctor or by a urologista doctor who specializes in the urinary tract. You may need treatment if you have symptoms or if a kidney stone is blocking your urinary tract. Small stones dont usually need treatment. Still, you may need pain medicine. You should also drink lots of fluids to help move the stone along. If you are vomiting often or dont drink enough fluids, you may need to go to the hospital and get fluids through a needle in your arm.
                
If you have a large kidney stone or your urinary tract is blocked, the urologist can remove the stone or break it into small pieces with the following treatments:
To prevent kidney stones, you need to know what caused your kidney stone. Your doctor may ask you to try to catch the kidney stone as it passes in your urine. The kidney stone can then be sent to a lab to find out what type of stone it is. If you have treatment in the hospital and the doctor removes the stone, it will also be sent to a lab for testing.
                
Your doctor may ask you to collect your urine for 24 hours after the stone has passed or been removed. Your doctor can then measure how much urine you produce in a day and mineral levels in the urine. You are more likely to form stones if you dont make enough urine each day or have a problem with mineral levels.
                
Once you know what type of kidney stone you had, you can make changes in your eating, diet, and nutrition and take medicines to prevent future kidney stones.
You can help prevent kidney stones by making changes in how much you consume of the following:
                
- fluids  - sodium  - animal protein  - calcium  - oxalate
                
Drinking enough fluids each day is the best way to help prevent most types of kidney stones. You should drink 2 to 3 liters of fluid a day. If you had cystine stones, you may need to drink even more.
                
Though water is best, other fluids may also help prevent kidney stones, such as orange juice or lemonade. Talk with your health care provider if you cant drink the recommended amount due to other health problems, such as urinary incontinence, urinary frequency, or kidney failure.
                
You can make the following changes to your diet based on the type of kidney stone you had:
                
Calcium Oxalate Stones
                
- reduce sodium  - reduce animal protein, such as meat, eggs, and fish  - get enough calcium from food or take calcium supplements with food  - avoid foods high in oxalate, such as spinach, rhubarb, nuts, and wheat bran
                
Calcium Phosphate Stones
                
- reduce sodium  - reduce animal protein  - get enough calcium from food or take calcium supplements with food
                
Uric Acid Stones
                
- limit animal protein
                
More information about how changes in diet affect kidney stone formation is provided in the NIDDK health topic, Diet for Kidney Stone Prevention.
                

                
Medicines
                
Your doctor may prescribe medicines based on the type of kidney stone you had and any health problems you have that make you more likely to form a stone.
A kidney stone is a solid piece of material that forms in a kidney when substances that are normally found in the urine become highly concentrated. A stone may stay in the kidney or travel down the urinary tract. Kidney stones vary in size. A small stone may pass on its own, causing little or no pain. A larger stone may get stuck along the urinary tract and can block the flow of urine, causing severe pain or bleeding.
                
Kidney stones are one of the most common disorders of the urinary tract. Each year in the United States, people make more than a million visits to health care providers and more than 300,000 people go to emergency rooms for kidney stone problems.1
                
Urolithiasis is the medical term used to describe stones occurring in the urinary tract. Other frequently used terms are urinary tract stone disease and nephrolithiasis. Terms that describe the location of the stone in the urinary tract are sometimes used. For example, a ureteral stoneor ureterolithiasisis a kidney stone found in the ureter.
Anyone can get a kidney stone, but some people are more likely to get one. Men are affected more often than women, and kidney stones are more common in non-Hispanic white people than in non-Hispanic black people and Mexican Americans. Overweight and obese people are more likely to get a kidney stone than people of normal weight. In the United States, 8.8 percent of the population, or one in 11 people, have had a kidney stone.2
Kidney stones can form when substances in the urinesuch as calcium, oxalate, and phosphorusbecome highly concentrated. Certain foods may promote stone formation in people who are susceptible, but scientists do not believe that eating any specific food causes stones to form in people who are not susceptible. People who do not drink enough fluids may also be at higher risk, as their urine is more concentrated.
                
People who are at increased risk of kidney stones are those with
                
- hypercalciuria, a condition that runs in families in which urine contains unusually large amounts of calcium; this is the most common condition found in those who form calcium stones  - a family history of kidney stones  - cystic kidney diseases, which are disorders that cause fluid-filled sacs to form on the kidneys  - hyperparathyroidism, a condition in which the parathyroid glands, which are four pea-sized glands located in the neck, release too much hormone, causing extra calcium in the blood  - renal tubular acidosis, a disease that occurs when the kidneys fail to excrete acids into the urine, which causes a persons blood to remain too acidic  - cystinuria, a condition in which urine contains high levels of the amino acid cystine  - hyperoxaluria, a condition in which urine contains unusually large amounts of oxalate  - hyperuricosuria, a disorder of uric acid metabolism  - gout, a disorder that causes painful swelling of the joints  - blockage of the urinary tract  - chronic inflammation of the bowel  - a history of gastrointestinal (GI) tract surgery
                
Others at increased risk of kidney stones are people taking certain medications including
                
- diureticsmedications that help the kidneys remove fluid from the body  - calcium-based antacids  - the protease inhibitor indinavir (Crixivan), a medication used to treat HIV infection  - the anti-seizure medication topiramate (Topamax)
People with kidney stones may have pain while urinating, see blood in the urine, or feel a sharp pain in the back or lower abdomen. The pain may last for a short or long time. People may experience nausea and vomiting with the pain. However, people who have small stones that pass easily through the urinary tract may not have symptoms at all.
To diagnose kidney stones, the health care provider will perform a physical exam and take a medical history. The medical history may include questions about family history of kidney stones, diet, GI problems, and other diseases and disorders. The health care provider may perform urine, blood, and imaging tests, such as an x ray or computerized tomography (CT) scan to complete the diagnosis.
                
- Urinalysis. Urinalysis is testing of a urine sample. The urine sample is collected in a special container in a health care providers office or commercial facility and can be tested in the same location or sent to a lab for analysis. Urinalysis can show whether the person has an infection or the urine contains substances that form stones.  - Blood test. A blood test involves drawing blood at a health care providers office or commercial facility and sending the sample to a lab for analysis. The blood test can show biochemical problems that can lead to kidney stones.  - Abdominal x ray. An abdominal x ray is a picture created using radiation and recorded on film or on a computer. The amount of radiation used is small. An x ray is performed at a hospital or outpatient center by an x-ray technician, and the images are interpreted by a radiologista doctor who specializes in medical imaging. Anesthesia is not needed. The person will lie on a table or stand during the x ray. The x-ray machine is positioned over the abdominal area. The person will hold his or her breath as the picture is taken so that the picture will not be blurry. The person may be asked to change position for additional pictures. The x rays can show the location of stones in the kidney or urinary tract.  - CT scans. CT scans use a combination of x rays and computer technology to create three-dimensional (3-D) images. A CT scan may include the injection of a special dye, called contrast medium. CT scans require the person to lie on a table that slides into a tunnel-shaped device where the x rays are taken. The procedure is performed in an outpatient center or hospital by an x-ray technician, and the images are interpreted by a radiologist. Anesthesia is not needed. CT scans can show stone locations and conditions that may have caused the stone to form.
- A kidney stone is a solid piece of material that forms in a kidney when substances that are normally found in the urine become highly concentrated.  - Kidney stones are one of the most common disorders of the urinary tract.  - Certain foods may promote stone formation in people who are susceptible, but scientists do not believe that eating any specific food causes stones to form in people who are not susceptible.  - People with kidney stones may have pain while urinating, see blood in the urine, or feel a sharp pain in the back or lower abdomen. However, people who have small stones that pass easily through the urinary tract may not have symptoms at all.  - To diagnose kidney stones, the health care provider will perform a physical exam and take a medical history. The health care provider may perform urine, blood, and imaging tests to complete the diagnosis.  - Treatment for kidney stones usually depends on their size and what they are made of, as well as whether they are causing pain or obstructing the urinary tract. Treatments may include shock wave lithotripsy, ureteroscopy, or percutaneous nephrolithotomy.  - Kidney stones may be prevented through changes in eating, diet, and nutrition and medications.