Medullary cystic kidney disease (MCKD) is a chronic, progressive kidney disease characterized by the presence of small renal cysts that eventually lead to end stage renal failure. Symptoms typically appear at an average age of 28 years and may include polyuria (excessive production or passage of urine) and low urinary osmolality (decreased concentration) in the first morning urine. Later, symptoms of renal insufficiency typically progress to include anemia, metabolic acidosis and uremia. End stage renal disease (ESRD) eventually follows. There are 2 types of MCKD, which are both inherited in an autosomal dominant manner but are caused by mutations in different genes. MCKD 1 is caused by mutations in the MCKD1 gene (which has not yet been identified) and MCKD 2 is caused by mutations in the UMOD gene. The 2 types also differ by MCKD 1 being associated with ESRD at an average age of 62 years, while MCKD 2 is associated with ESRD around 32 years and is more likely to be associated with hyperuricemia and gout. Treatment for MCKD may include correction of water and electrolyte imbalances, and dialysis followed by renal transplantation for end-stage renal failure.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Medullary cystic kidney disease. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Adult onset - Anemia - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Cerebral cortical atrophy - Decreased glomerular filtration rate - Elevated serum creatinine - Glomerulosclerosis - Gout - Hypertension - Hypotension - Impaired renal uric acid clearance - Multiple small medullary renal cysts - Renal cortical atrophy - Renal corticomedullary cysts - Renal hypoplasia - Renal salt wasting - Stage 5 chronic kidney disease - Tubular atrophy - Tubular basement membrane disintegration - Tubulointerstitial fibrosis - Tubulointerstitial nephritis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 There are 2 types of MCKD, which are both inherited in an autosomal dominant manner but are caused by mutations in different genes. MCKD 1 is caused by mutations in the MCKD1 gene (which has not yet been identified) and MCKD 2 is caused by mutations in the UMOD gene. Exposure to seizure medication is not a known cause medullary cystic kidney disease.
2 types of MCKD are both inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that any individual with the condition has a 50% chance of passing on the disease causing mutation to any of their children.
Medullary cystic kidney disease (MCKD) is a chronic, progressive kidney disease characterized by the presence of small renal cysts that eventually lead to end stage renal failure. Symptoms typically appear at an average age of 28 years and may include polyuria (excessive production or passage of urine) and low urinary osmolality (decreased concentration) in the first morning urine. Later, symptoms of renal insufficiency typically progress to include anemia, metabolic acidosis and uremia. End stage renal disease (ESRD) eventually follows. There are 2 types of MCKD, which are both inherited in an autosomal dominant manner but are caused by mutations in different genes. MCKD 1 is caused by mutations in the MCKD1 gene (which has not yet been identified) and MCKD 2 is caused by mutations in the UMOD gene. The 2 types also differ by MCKD 1 being associated with ESRD at an average age of 62 years, while MCKD 2 is associated with ESRD around 32 years and is more likely to be associated with hyperuricemia and gout. Treatment for MCKD may include correction of water and electrolyte imbalances, and dialysis followed by renal transplantation for end-stage renal failure.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Medullary cystic kidney disease 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Adult onset - Anemia - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Cerebral cortical atrophy - Decreased glomerular filtration rate - Elevated serum creatinine - Glomerulosclerosis - Gout - Hypertension - Hypotension - Impaired renal uric acid clearance - Renal cortical atrophy - Renal corticomedullary cysts - Renal hypoplasia - Renal salt wasting - Stage 5 chronic kidney disease - Tubular atrophy - Tubular basement membrane disintegration - Tubulointerstitial fibrosis - Tubulointerstitial nephritis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Medullary cystic kidney disease type 1 (MCKD1) is an inherited condition that affects the kidneys. It leads to scarring (fibrosis) and impaired function of the kidneys, usually beginning in adulthood. The kidneys filter fluid and waste products from the body. They also reabsorb needed nutrients and release them back into the blood. As MCKD1 progresses, the kidneys are less able to function, resulting in kidney failure.  Declining kidney function in people with MCKD1 leads to the signs and symptoms of the condition. The features are variable, even among members of the same family. Many individuals with MCKD1 develop high blood pressure (hypertension), especially as kidney function worsens. Some develop high levels of a waste product called uric acid in the blood (hyperuricemia) because the damaged kidneys are unable to remove uric acid effectively. In a small number of affected individuals, the buildup of this waste product can cause gout, which is a form of arthritis resulting from uric acid crystals in the joints.  Although the condition is named medullary cystic kidney disease, only about 40 percent of affected individuals have medullary cysts, which are fluid filled pockets found in a particular region of the kidney. When present, the cysts are usually found in the inner part of the kidney (the medullary region) or the border between the inner and outer parts (corticomedullary region). These cysts are visible by tests such as ultrasound or CT scan.
MCKD1 is a rare disorder, although its prevalence is unknown.
MCKD1 is caused by mutations in the MUC1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called mucin 1, which is one of several mucin proteins that make up mucus. Mucus is a slippery substance that lubricates the lining of the airways, digestive system, reproductive system, and other organs and tissues and protects them from foreign invaders and other particles.  In addition to its role in mucus, mucin 1 relays signals from outside the cell to the cell's nucleus. Through this cellular signaling, mucin 1 is thought to be involved in the growth, movement, and survival of cells. Research suggests that mucin 1 plays a role in the normal development of the kidneys.  MCKD1 is caused by the insertion of a single DNA building block (nucleotide) called cytosine into the MUC1 gene. These mutations have been found in one particular region of the gene. They lead to the production of an altered protein. It is unclear how this change causes kidney disease.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of medullary cystic kidney disease type 1:  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Medullary Cystic Kidney Disease  - Merck Manual for Health Care Professionals: Nephronophthisis and Medullary Cystic Kidney Disease Complex   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Acquired cystic kidney disease happens when a person's kidneys develop fluid-filled sacs, called cysts, over time. Acquired cystic kidney disease is not the same as polycystic kidney disease (PKD), another disease that causes the kidneys to develop multiple cysts.
                
Acquired cystic kidney disease occurs in children and adults who have
                
- chronic kidney disease (CKD)a condition that develops over many years and may lead to end-stage kidney disease, or ESRD. The kidneys of people with CKD gradually lose their ability to filter wastes, extra salt, and fluid from the blood properly.  - end-stage kidney diseasetotal and permanent kidney failure that requires a kidney transplant or blood-filtering treatments called dialysis.
                
The cysts are more likely to develop in people who are on kidney dialysis. The chance of developing acquired cystic kidney disease increases with the number of years a person is on dialysis. However, the cysts are caused by CKD or kidney failure, not dialysis treatments.
                
More information is provided in the NIDDK health topics, kidney failureand dialysis.
Acquired cystic kidney disease becomes more common the longer a person has CKD.
                
- About 7 to 22 percent of people with CKD already have acquired cystic kidney disease before starting dialysis treatments.  - Almost 60 percent of people on dialysis for 2 to 4 years develop acquired cystic kidney disease.1  - About 90 percent of people on dialysis for 8 years develop acquired cystic kidney disease.1
Researchers do not fully understand what causes cysts to grow in the kidneys of people with CKD. The fact that these cysts occur only in the kidneys and not in other parts of the body, as in PKD, indicates that the processes that lead to cyst formation take place primarily inside the kidneys.2
A person with acquired cystic kidney disease often has no symptoms. However, the complications of acquired cystic kidney disease can have signs and symptoms.
People with acquired cystic kidney disease may develop the following complications:
                
- an infected cyst, which can cause fever and back pain.  - blood in the urine, which can signal that a cyst in the kidney is bleeding.  - tumors in the kidneys. People with acquired cystic kidney disease are more likely than people in the general population to have cancerous kidney tumors. However, the chance of cancer spreading is lower in people with acquired cystic kidney disease than that of other kidney cancers not associated with acquired cystic kidney disease, and the long-term outlook is better.1
If acquired cystic kidney disease is not causing complications, a person does not need treatment. A health care provider will treat infections with antibioticsmedications that kill bacteria. If large cysts are causing pain, a health care provider may drain the cyst using a long needle inserted into the cyst through the skin.
                
When a surgeon transplants a new kidney into a patient's body to treat kidney failure, acquired cystic kidney disease in the damaged kidneys, which usually remain in place after a transplant, often disappears.
                
A surgeon may perform an operation to remove tumors or suspected tumors. In rare cases, a surgeon performs an operation to stop cysts from bleeding.
                
Have Regular Screenings to Look for Cyst or Tumor Growth   Some health care providers recommend all people with end-stage kidney disease get screened for kidney cancer using CT scans or MRIs after 3 years of dialysis. People with acquired cystic kidney disease should talk with their health care provider about when to begin screening.
No specific diet will prevent or delay acquired cystic kidney disease. In general, a diet designed for people on hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis reduces the amount of wastes that accumulate in the body between dialysis sessions.
                
More information is provided in the NIDDK health topics, Eat Right to Feel Right on Hemodialysis and Nutrition for Advanced Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults.