Pyelonephritis is a type of urinary tract infection (UTI) that affects one or both kidneys.
Pyelonephritis is caused by a bacterium or virus infecting the kidneys. Though many bacteria and viruses can cause pyelonephritis, the bacterium Escherichia coli is often the cause. Bacteria and viruses can move to the kidneys from the bladder or can be carried through the bloodstream from other parts of the body. A UTI in the bladder that does not move to the kidneys is called cystitis.
People most at risk for pyelonephritis are those who have a bladder infection and those with a structural, or anatomic, problem in the urinary tract. Urine normally flows only in one directionfrom the kidneys to the bladder. However, the flow of urine may be blocked in people with a structural defect of the urinary tract, a kidney stone, or an enlarged prostatethe walnut-shaped gland in men that surrounds the urethra at the neck of the bladder and supplies fluid that goes into semen. Urine can also back up, or reflux, into one or both kidneys. This problem, which is called vesicoureteral reflux (VUR), happens when the valve mechanism that normally prevents backward flow of urine is not working properly. VUR is most commonly diagnosed during childhood. Pregnant women and people with diabetes or a weakened immune system are also at increased risk of pyelonephritis.
Symptoms of pyelonephritis can vary depending on a persons age and may include the following:
                
- fever  - vomiting  - back, side, and groin pain  - chills  - nausea  - frequent, painful urination
                
Children younger than 2 years old may only have a high fever without symptoms related to the urinary tract. Older people may not have any symptoms related to the urinary tract either; instead, they may exhibit confusion, disordered speech, or hallucinations.
Most people with pyelonephritis do not have complications if appropriately treated with bacteria-fighting medications called antibiotics.
                
In rare cases, pyelonephritis may cause permanent kidney scars, which can lead to chronic kidney disease, high blood pressure, and kidney failure. These problems usually occur in people with a structural problem in the urinary tract, kidney disease from other causes, or repeated episodes of pyelonephritis.
                
Infection in the kidneys may spread to the bloodstreama serious condition called sepsisthough this is also uncommon.
Pyelonephritis is treated with antibiotics, which may need to be taken for several weeks. While a urine sample is sent to a lab for culture, the health care provider may begin treatment with an antibiotic that fights the most common types of bacteria. Once culture results are known and the bacteria is clearly identified, the health care provider may switch the antibiotic to one that more effectively targets the bacteria. Antibiotics may be given through a vein, orally, or both. Urinary tract obstructions are often treated with surgery.
                
Severely ill patients may be hospitalized and limited to bed rest until they can take the fluids and medications they need on their own. Fluids and medications may be given intravenously during this time.
                
In adults, repeat urine cultures should be performed after treatment has ended to make sure the infection does not recur. If a repeat test shows infection, another 14-day course of antibiotics is prescribed; if infection recurs again, antibiotics are prescribed for 6 weeks.
Eating, diet, and nutrition have not been shown to play a role in causing or preventing pyelonephritis.