Klinefelter syndrome (KS) is a condition that occurs in males when they have an extra X chromosome. Some males with KS have no obvious signs or symptoms while others may have varying degrees of cognitive, social, behavioral, and learning difficulties. Adults with Klinefelter syndrome may also experience primary hypogonadism (decreased testosterone production), small testes, enlarged breast tissue (gynecomastia), tall stature, and/or infertility. KS is not inherited, but usually occurs as a random event during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs and sperm). Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
 Klinefelter syndrome usually occurs as a random event during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs and sperm). An error in cell division called nondisjunction results in a reproductive cell with an abnormal number of chromosomes. For example, an egg or sperm cell may gain one or more extra copies of the X chromosome as a result of nondisjunction. If one of these atypical reproductive cells contributes to the genetic makeup of a child, the child will have one or more extra X chromosomes in each of the body's cells. Most often, Klinefelter syndrome is caused by a single extra copy of the X chromosome, resulting in a total of 47 chromosomes per cell. Males normally have one X chromosome and one Y chromosome in each cell (46, XY), while females have two X chromosomes (46, XX). People with Klinefelter syndrome usually have two X chromosomes and one Y chromosome (47, XXY). Some people with Klinefelter syndrome have the extra X chromosome in only some of their cells; these people are said to have mosaic Klinefelter syndrome. It is estimated that about half of the time, the cell division error occurs during development of the sperm, while the remainder are due to errors in egg development. Women who have pregnancies after age 35 have a slightly increased chance of having offspring with this syndrome. The features of Klinefelter syndrome are due to the extra copies of genes on the extra X chromosome, which can alter male sexual development.
 Klinefelter syndrome is not inherited, but usually occurs as a random event during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs and sperm). An error in cell division called nondisjunction can result in reproductive cells with an abnormal number of chromosomes. For example, an egg or sperm cell may gain one or more extra copies of the X chromosome as a result of nondisjunction. If one of these reproductive cells contributes to the genetic makeup of a child, the child will have one or several extra X chromosomes in each of the body's cells.
 A diagnosis of Klinefelter syndrome is often suspected based on the presence of characteristic signs and symptoms. Additional testing can then be ordered to confirm the diagnosis. This generally includes a chromosomal analysis (called a karyotype). It is also possible to diagnosis Klinefelter syndrome before birth through chorionic villous sampling or amniocentesis.
 Because symptoms of Klinefelter syndrome (KS) can sometimes be very mild, many people are never diagnosed or treated. When a diagnosis is made, treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person. This may include: Educational interventions - As children, many people with Klinefelter syndrome qualify for special services to help them in school. Teachers can also help by using certain methods in the classroom, such as breaking bigger tasks into small steps. Therapeutic options - A variety of therapists, such as physical, speech, occupational, behavioral, mental health, and family therapists can often help reduce or eliminate some of the symptoms of Klinefelter syndrome such as poor muscle tone; speech and language problems; or low self-confidence. Medical management - About half of people with KS have low testosterone levels, which may be raised by taking supplemental testosterone. Having a more normal testosterone level can help affected people develop bigger muscles, a deeper voice, and facial and body hair. Many healthcare providers recommend testosterone therapy when a boy reaches puberty. However, not all males with KS benefit from testosterone therapy. Some affected people may opt to have breast removal or reduction surgery. The Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development's Web site offers more specific information on the treatment and management of Klinefelter syndrome. Please click on the link to access this resource.
Klinefelter syndrome affects 1 in 500 to 1,000 newborn males. Most variants of Klinefelter syndrome are much rarer, occurring in 1 in 50,000 or fewer newborns.  Researchers suspect that Klinefelter syndrome is underdiagnosed because the condition may not be identified in people with mild signs and symptoms. Additionally, the features of the condition vary and overlap significantly with those of other conditions.
Klinefelter syndrome is a condition related to the X and Y chromosomes (the sex chromosomes). People typically have two sex chromosomes in each cell: females have two X chromosomes (46,XX), and males have one X and one Y chromosome (46,XY). Most often, Klinefelter syndrome results from the presence of one extra copy of the X chromosome in each cell (47,XXY). Extra copies of genes on the X chromosome interfere with male sexual development, often preventing the testes from functioning normally and reducing the levels of testosterone. Most people with an extra X chromosome have the features described above, although some have few or no associated signs and symptoms.  Some people with features of Klinefelter syndrome have more than one extra sex chromosome in each cell (for example, 48,XXXY or 49,XXXXY). These conditions, which are often called variants of Klinefelter syndrome, tend to cause more severe signs and symptoms than classic Klinefelter syndrome. In addition to affecting male sexual development, variants of Klinefelter syndrome are associated with intellectual disability, distinctive facial features, skeletal abnormalities, poor coordination, and severe problems with speech. As the number of extra sex chromosomes increases, so does the risk of these health problems.  Some people with features of Klinefelter syndrome have the extra X chromosome in only some of their cells; in these individuals, the condition is described as mosaic Klinefelter syndrome (46,XY/47,XXY). Individuals with mosaic Klinefelter syndrome may have milder signs and symptoms, depending on how many cells have an additional X chromosome.