Klippel Feil syndrome (KFS) is a congenital, musculoskeletal condition characterized by the fusion of at least two vertebrae of the neck. Common symptoms include a short neck, low hairline at the back of the head, and restricted mobility of the upper spine. This condition can cause chronic headaches as well as pain in both the neck and the back. Other features may involve various other body parts or systems. Sometimes, KFS occurs as a feature of another disorder or syndrome, such as Wildervanck syndrome or hemifacial microsomia. In these cases, affected people have the features of both KFS and the additional disorder. KFS may be caused by mutations in the GDF6 or GDF3 gene and inherited in an autosomal dominant manner; or, it may be caused by mutations in the MEOX1 gene and inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment is symptomatic and may include medications, surgery, and/or physical therapy.
  The specific underlying causes and mechanisms of Klippel Feil syndrome (KFS)are not well understood.  In general medical researchers believe KFS happens when the tissue of the embroyo that normally develops into separate vertebrae does not divide correctly.  More specifically, when KFS occurs with other syndromes such as fetal alcohol syndrome, Goldenhar syndrome, Wildervanck syndrome or hemifacial microsomia, medical researchers believe KFS has the same cause as the associated syndrome.  Isolated KFS (meaning not associated with another syndrome) can be sporadic or inherited.  Although KFS may in some cases be caused by a combination of genetic and environmental factors, mutations in at least three genes have been linked to KFS: GDF6, GDF3 and MEOX1 gene.
 In some cases, Klippel Feil syndrome (KFS) appears to occur randomly for unknown reasons (sporadically). In other cases, the condition appears to be genetic and may occur in more than one person in a family. Both autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive inheritance patterns have been reported, with different responsible genes. When KFS is caused by changes (mutations) in the GDF6 or GDF3 genes, it is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that having a mutation in only one copy of the responsible gene is enough to cause features of the condition. When a person with an autosomal dominant condition has children, each child has a 50% (1 in 2) chance to inherit the mutated copy of the gene. When KFS is caused by mutations in the MEOX1 gene, it is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that a person must have mutations in both copies of the responsible gene to be affected. The parents of a person with an autosomal recessive condition usually each carry one mutated copy of the gene and are referred to as carriers. Carriers are typically unaffected. When two carriers of the same autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to be affected, a 50% (1 in 2) chance to be an unaffected carrier like each parent, and a 25% risk to be unaffected and not be a carrier. When KFS occurs as a feature of another condition, the inheritance pattern follows that of the other condition.
 Klippel Feil syndrome (KFS) is typically diagnosed when X-rays or other imaging techniques show fusion of cervical vertebrae. X-rays of the entire spine should be performed to detect other spinal abnormalities, and additional imaging studies may be needed to assess the extent of the abnormality. KFS can be associated with a wide range of other abnormalities involving many parts of the body. Therefore, other initial exams are needed to detect additional physical abnormalities or underlying conditions. These include: examination of the chest to rule out involvement of the heart and lungs examination of the chest wall to detect possible rib anomalies MRI for spinal stenosis or neurological deficits ultrasound of the kidneys for renal abnormalities hearing evaluation due to high incidence of hearing loss Various lab tests to assess organ function Additional tests or consultations with specialists may be recommended depending on the features present in each person with KFS.
 There is no cure for Klippel Feil syndrome (KFS); treatment is generally symptomatic and supportive. Management depends on the features and severity in each person, and can be life-long. Careful evaluation, consistent follow-up, and coordination with various specialists are needed to improve outcome and make sure that no related diagnosis is missed. There are various conservative therapies available, including the use of cervical collars, braces, traction, physical therapy, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and various pain medications. However, for many people with KFS, symptoms are progressive due to degenerative changes that occur in the spine. Surgery may be indicated for a variety of reasons, including persistent pain; neurologic deficits; cervical or craniocervical instability; constriction of the spinal cord; or to correct severe scoliosis. Some people with KFS may need surgery to repair other skeletal abnormalities, or those related to the heart, kidneys, ears, eyes, or other parts of the body. Those at an increased risk for neurological complications should be regularly monitored by their health care providers and may be advised to avoid activities that could lead to trauma or injury to cervical vertebrae.
Klippel-Feil Syndrome is a rare disorder characterized by the congenital fusion of two or more cervical (neck) vertebrae. It is caused by a failure in the normal segmentation or division of the cervical vertebrae during the early weeks of fetal development. The most common signs of the disorder are short neck, low hairline at the back of the head, and restricted mobility of the upper spine. The fused vertebrae can cause nerve damage and pain in the head, neck, or back. Associated abnormalities may include scoliosis (curvature of the spine), spina bifida (a birth defect of the spine), cleft palate, respiratory problems, and heart malformations. Other features may include joint pain; anomalies of the head and face, skeleton, sex organs, muscles, brain and spinal cord, arms, legs, and fingers; and difficulties hearing. Most cases are sporadic (happen on their own) but mutations in the GDF6 (growth differentiation factor 6) or GDF3 (growth differentiation factor 3) genes can cause the disorder. These genes make proteins that are involved in bone development and segmentation of the vertebrae.
Treatment for Klippel-Feil Syndrome is symptomatic and may include surgery to relieve cervical or craniocervical instability and constriction of the spinal cord, and to correct scoliosis. Physical therapy may also be useful.
The prognosis for most individuals with Klippel-Feil Syndrome is good if the disorder is treated early and appropriately. Activities that can injure the neck should be avoided.
The mission of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) is to seek fundamental knowledge abuot the brain and nervous system, and to use that knowledge to reduce the burden of neurological disease. Research supported by the NINDS includes studies to understand how the brain and nervous system normally develop and function and how they are affected by disease and trauma. These studies contribute to a greater understanding of birth defects such as Klippel-Feil Syndrome and open promising new avenues for treatment.