Klippel-Feil syndrome is estimated to occur in 1 in 40,000 to 42,000 newborns worldwide. Females seem to be affected slightly more often than males.
Mutations in the GDF6, GDF3, or MEOX1 gene can cause Klippel-Feil syndrome. These genes are involved in proper bone development. The protein produced from the GDF6 gene is necessary for the formation of bones and joints, including those in the spine. While the protein produced from the GDF3 gene is known to be involved in bone development, its exact role is unclear. The protein produced from the MEOX1 gene, called homeobox protein MOX-1, regulates the process that begins separating vertebrae from one another during early development.  GDF6 and GDF3 gene mutations that cause Klippel-Feil syndrome likely lead to reduced function of the respective proteins. MEOX1 gene mutations lead to a complete lack of homeobox protein MOX-1. Although the GDF6, GDF3, and homeobox protein MOX-1 proteins are involved in bone development, particularly formation of vertebrae, it is unclear how a shortage of one of these proteins leads to incomplete separation of the cervical vertebrae in people with Klippel-Feil syndrome.  When Klippel-Feil syndrome is a feature of another disorder, it is caused by mutations in genes involved in the other disorder.
When Klippel-Feil syndrome is caused by mutations in the GDF6 or GDF3 genes, it is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  When caused by mutations in the MEOX1 gene, Klippel-Feil syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.  As a feature of another disorder, Klippel-Feil syndrome is inherited in whatever pattern the other disorder follows.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Klippel-Feil syndrome:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Klippel Feil syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Klippel-Feil syndrome 1, autosomal dominant  - Genetic Testing Registry: Klippel-Feil syndrome 2, autosomal recessive  - Genetic Testing Registry: Klippel-Feil syndrome 3, autosomal dominant   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care