There are many different types and designs of artificial knees. Most consist of three components: -  the femoral component, which is the part that attaches to the thigh bone  - the tibial component, the part that attaches to the shin bone   - the patellar component, the knee cap. the femoral component, which is the part that attaches to the thigh bone the tibial component, the part that attaches to the shin bone the patellar component, the knee cap. Total and Partial Knee Replacement Knee replacement may be either total or partial/unicompartmental. In total knee replacement, as the name suggests, the entire knee joint is replaced. You will likely need a total knee replacement if you have damage to several parts of your knee. In partial/unicompartmental knee replacement, the surgeon replaces just the damaged part of the knee. You may be able to have a partial knee replacement if only one section of your knee is damaged. However, when one part is replaced, there is a chance that another part will develop arthritis, requiring further surgery. Cemented and Uncemented Joint Components Joint components may also be attached to your own bone in different ways. Most are cemented with a special joint glue into your existing bone; others rely on a process called biologic fixation to hold them in place. This means that the parts are made with a porous surface, and over time your own bone grows into the joint surface to secure them. In some cases, surgeons use a combination of cemented and uncemented parts. This is referred to as a hybrid implant. Minimally Invasive Surgery While some knee replacement surgery requires an 8- to 12-inch incision in the front of the knee, surgeons at many medical centers are now performing what is called minimally invasive surgery using incisions of 3 to 5 inches or even smaller. Because the incision is smaller, there may be less pain and a shorter recovery time. If you think you might be interested in minimally invasive surgery, speak with your surgeon.
While new technology and advances in surgical techniques have greatly reduced the risks involved with knee replacements, there are still some risks you should be aware of. Two of the most common possible problems are blood clots and infection. Preventing Blood Clots Blood clots can occur in the veins of your legs after knee replacement surgery. To reduce the risk of clots, your doctor may have you elevate your leg periodically and prescribe special exercises, support hose, or blood thinners. Preventing Infections Infection can occur when bacteria enter the bloodstream from skin or urinary tract infections. To reduce the risk of infection, your doctors may prescribe antibiotics for you to take prior to your surgery and for a short time afterward. Other Complications Other complications, such as new or ongoing pain, stiffness, fracture, bleeding, or injury to the blood vessels can occur. Serious medical complications, such as heart attack or stroke, are very rare. Warning Signs To Watch For To minimize the risk of complications, it is important to recognize signs of potential problems early and contact your doctor. For example, tenderness, redness, and swelling of your calf or swelling of your thigh, ankle, calf, or foot could be warning signs of a possible blood clot. Warning signs of infection include fever or chills, tenderness and swelling of the wound, and drainage from the wound. You should call your doctor if you experience any of these symptoms. It is important to get instructions from your doctor before leaving the hospital and follow them carefully once you get home. Doing so will give you the greatest chance of a successful surgery.
Treatments your doctor will likely recommend before knee replacement include - exercises to strengthen the muscles around the knee and improve flexibility  - weight loss, if needed, to reduce the load the knee must bear   - walking aids such as canes to reduce stress on the joint   - shoe inserts to improve the knees alignment  - medicines to relieve pain.  exercises to strengthen the muscles around the knee and improve flexibility weight loss, if needed, to reduce the load the knee must bear walking aids such as canes to reduce stress on the joint shoe inserts to improve the knees alignment medicines to relieve pain.
Because a fall can damage your new knee, making your home a safe place is crucial. Before your surgery, look for and correct hazards, including cluttered floors, loose electrical cords, unsecured rugs, and dark hallways. A raised toilet seat can make it easier to get up and down. Grab bars in the tub can keep you steady.