LADD syndrome appears to be a rare condition; at least 60 cases have been described in the scientific literature.
Mutations in the FGFR2, FGFR3, or FGF10 gene can cause LADD syndrome.  The FGFR2 and FGFR3 genes provide instructions for making proteins that are part of a family called fibroblast growth factor receptors. The FGF10 gene provides instructions for making a protein called a fibroblast growth factor, which is a family of proteins that attaches (binds) to fibroblast growth factor receptors. The receptors are located within the membranes of cells, where they receive signals that control growth and development from growth factors outside the cell. The signals triggered by the FGFR2, FGFR3, and FGF10 genes appear to stimulate cells to form the structures that make up the lacrimal glands, salivary glands, ears, skeleton, and many other organs.  Mutations in the FGFR2, FGFR3, or FGF10 gene alter the proteins produced from these genes and disrupt the signaling within cells. As a result, cell maturation and development is impaired and the formation of many tissues is affected, leading to the signs and symptoms of LADD syndrome.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means a mutation in one copy of the FGFR2, FGFR3, or FGF10 gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of lacrimo-auriculo-dento-digital syndrome:  - American Academy of Ophthalmology: The Tearing Patient  - Cincinnati Children's Hospital: Tear Duct Probing and Irrigation  - Cleveland Clinic: Dry Eyes  - Cleveland Clinic: Dry Mouth Treatment  - Genetic Testing Registry: Levy-Hollister syndrome  - Monroe Carell Jr. Children's Hospital at Vanderbilt: Blocked Tear Duct (Dacryostenosis)   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care