Lafora disease is an inherited, severe form of progressive myoclonus epilepsy. The condition most commonly begins with epileptic seizures in late childhood or adolescence. Other signs and symptoms include difficulty walking, muscle spasms (myoclonus) and dementia. Affected people also experience rapid cognitive deterioration that begins around the same time as the seizures. The condition is often fatal within 10 years of onset. Most cases are caused by changes (mutations) in either the EPM2A gene or the NHLRC1 gene and are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
 Most cases of Lafora disease are caused by changes (mutations) in either the EPM2A gene or the NHLRC1 gene. These genes encode proteins that play a critical role in the survival of nerve cells (neurons) in the brain. Although the proteins are thought to have many functions in the body, one important role is to help regulate the production of a complex sugar called glycogen (an important source of stored energy in the body). Mutations in the EPM2A gene or the NHLRC1 gene interfere with the production of functional proteins, leading to the formation of Lafora bodies (clumps of abnormal glycogen that cannot be broken down and used for fuel) within cells. A build up of Lafora bodies appears to be especially toxic to the cells of the nervous system and leads to the signs and symptoms of Lafora disease.
 Lafora disease is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that to be affected, a person must have a mutation in both copies of the responsible gene in each cell. The parents of an affected person usually each carry one mutated copy of the gene and are referred to as carriers. Carriers typically do not show signs or symptoms of the condition. When two carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be a carrier like each of the parents, and a 25% chance to not have the condition and not be a carrier.
 A diagnosis of Lafora disease is often suspected based on the presence of characteristic signs and symptoms. Additional testing can then be ordered to confirm the diagnosis and rule out other conditions that may cause similar features. For example, a skin biopsy may be performed to detect "Lafora bodies" (clumps of abnormal glycogen that cannot be broken down and used for fuel) which are found in most people with the condition. Genetic testing for changes (mutations) in either the EPM2A gene or the NHLRC1 gene may be used to confirm the diagnosis in some cases. An EEG and an MRI of the brain are generally recommended in all people with recurrent seizures and are useful in investigating other conditions in the differential diagnosis. GeneReview's Web site offers more specific information regarding the diagnosis of Lafora disease. Please click on the link to access this resource.
 Unfortunately, there is currently no cure for Lafora disease or way to slow the progression of the condition. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person. For example, certain medications may be recommended to managed generalized seizures. In the advanced stages of the condition, a gastrostomy tube may be placed for feeding. Drugs that are known to worsen myoclonus (i.e. phenytoin) are generally avoided. GeneReview's Web site offers more specific information regarding the treatment and management of Lafora disease. Please click on the link to access this resource.