Laron syndrome is a condition that occurs when the body is unable to utilize growth hormone. It is primarily characterized by short stature. Other signs and symptoms vary but may include reduced muscle strength and endurance; hypoglycemia in infancy; delayed puberty; short limbs (arms and legs); and obesity. It is often caused by changes (mutations) in the GHR gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment is focused on improving growth and generally includes injections of insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1).
 Laron syndrome is caused by changes (mutations) in the GHR gene. This gene encodes growth hormone receptor, which is a protein found on the outer membrane of cells throughout the body. Growth hormone receptor is designed to recognize and bind growth hormone, which triggers cellular growth and division. When growth hormone is bound to the growth hormone receptors on liver cells, specifically, insulin-like growth factor I (another important growth-promoting hormone) is produced. Mutations in GHR impair the function of growth hormone receptors which interferes with their ability to bind growth hormone. This disrupts normal growth and development of cells and prevents the production of insulin-like growth factor I which causes the many signs and symptoms of Laron syndrome.
 Most cases of Laron syndrome are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that to be affected, a person must have a mutation in both copies of the responsible gene in each cell. The parents of an affected person usually each carry one mutated copy of the gene and are referred to as carriers. Carriers typically do not show signs or symptoms of the condition. When two carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be a carrier like each of the parents, and a 25% chance to not have the condition and not be a carrier. Reports exist of rare families in which Laron syndrome appears to be inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. In these cases, a person only needs a change (mutation) in one copy of the responsible gene in each cell. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from an affected parent. Other cases may result from new (de novo) mutations in the gene. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. An affected person has a 50% chance with each pregnancy of passing along the altered gene to his or her child.
 A diagnosis of Laron syndrome is often suspected based on the presence of characteristic signs and symptoms. Additional testing can then be ordered to confirm the diagnosis and rule out other conditions that cause similar features. This generally includes blood tests to measure the levels of certain hormones that are often abnormal in people with Laron syndrome. For example, affected people may have elevated levels of growth hormone and reduced levels of insulin-like growth factor I. Genetic testing for changes (mutations) in the GHR gene can also be used to confirm a diagnosis in some cases.
 There is currently no cure for Laron syndrome. Treatment is primarily focused on improving growth. The only specific treatment available for this condition is subcutaneous injections of insulin-like growth factor 1 (a growth-promoting hormone), often called IGF-1. IGF-1 stimulates linear growth (height) and also improves brain growth and metabolic abnormalities caused by long-term IGF-1 deficiency. It has also been shown to raise blood glucose levels, reduce cholesterol, and increase muscle growth. IGF-1 and GH levels should be closely monitored in people undergoing this treatment because overdosage of IGF-I causes a variety of health problems.
Laron syndrome is a rare disorder. About 350 people have been diagnosed with the condition worldwide. The largest single group of affected individuals (about 100 people) lives in an area of southern Ecuador.
Laron syndrome is caused by mutations in the GHR gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called the growth hormone receptor. The receptor is present on the outer membrane of cells throughout the body, particularly liver cells. As its name suggests, the growth hormone receptor attaches (binds) to growth hormone; the two proteins fit together like a key in a lock. When growth hormone is bound to its receptor, it triggers signaling that stimulates the growth and division of cells. This signaling also leads to the production, primarily by liver cells, of another important growth-promoting hormone called insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I).  Growth hormone and IGF-I have a wide variety of effects on the growth and function of many parts of the body. For example, these hormones stimulate the growth and division of cells called chondrocytes, which play a critical role in producing new bone tissue. Growth hormone and IGF-I also influence metabolism, including how the body uses and stores carbohydrates, proteins, and fats from food.  Mutations in the GHR gene impair the receptor's ability to bind to growth hormone or to trigger signaling within cells. As a result, even when growth hormone is available, cells are unable to respond by producing IGF-I and stimulating growth and division. The cells' inability to react to growth hormone, which is described as growth hormone insensitivity, disrupts the normal growth and function of many different tissues. Short stature results when growth hormone cannot adequately stimulate the growth of bones. Changes in metabolism caused by insensitivity to growth hormone and the resulting shortage of IGF-I cause many of the other features of the condition, including obesity.  Researchers are working to determine how mutations in the GHR gene may protect people with Laron syndrome from developing cancer and type 2 diabetes. Studies suggest that insensitivity to growth hormone may help prevent the uncontrolled growth and division of cells that can lead to the development of cancerous tumors. Growth hormone insensitivity also appears to alter how the body responds to insulin, which is a hormone that regulates blood sugar levels. Resistance to the effects of insulin is a major risk factor for type 2 diabetes. People with Laron syndrome have the opposite situation, an increased sensitivity to insulin, which likely helps explain their reduced risk of this common disease.