Larsen syndrome is a condition that causes abnormal development of the bones. Signs and symptoms may include clubfoot and numerous joint dislocations at birth (affecting the hips, knees and elbows); flexible joints; and a distinctive appearance of the face, hands and feet. Larsen syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner and is caused by mutations in the FLNB gene. Management may include surgeries (especially for hip dislocation), and physiotherapy.
 Larson syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. A condition is autosomal dominant when having one copy of the changed (mutated) gene in each cell is enough to cause signs or symptoms of the condition. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent; in other cases, a new mutation occurs for the first time in the affected person. While some authors have suggested autosomal recessive inheritance in families with affected siblings and unaffected parents, it was found that some of these children were affected due to germline mosaicism. This means that multiple siblings in a family inherited a disease-causing mutation from an unaffected parent who had the mutation in some or all of their egg or sperm cells only (not other body cells). This can cause a condition to appear autosomal recessive. Also, some other conditions with autosomal recessive inheritance and symptoms that overlap with Larsen syndrome have been diagnosed as Larsen syndrome, but are now mostly considered different conditions. These conditions are usually more severe and due to mutations in different genes.
Larsen syndrome occurs in approximately 1 in 100,000 newborns.
Mutations in the FLNB gene cause Larsen syndrome. The FLNB gene provides instructions for making a protein called filamin B. This protein helps build the network of protein filaments (cytoskeleton) that gives structure to cells and allows them to change shape and move. Filamin B attaches (binds) to another protein called actin and helps the actin to form the branching network of filaments that makes up the cytoskeleton. It also links actin to many other proteins to perform various functions within the cell, including the cell signaling that helps determine how the cytoskeleton will change as tissues grow and take shape during development.  Filamin B is especially important in the development of the skeleton before birth. It is active (expressed) in the cell membranes of cartilage-forming cells (chondrocytes). Cartilage is a tough, flexible tissue that makes up much of the skeleton during early development. Most cartilage is later converted to bone (a process called ossification), except for the cartilage that continues to cover and protect the ends of bones and is present in the nose, airways (trachea and bronchi), and external ears. Filamin B appears to be important for normal cell growth and division (proliferation) and maturation (differentiation) of chondrocytes and for the ossification of cartilage.  FLNB gene mutations that cause Larsen syndrome change single protein building blocks (amino acids) in the filamin B protein or delete a small section of the protein sequence, resulting in an abnormal protein. This abnormal protein appears to have a new, atypical function that interferes with the proliferation or differentiation of chondrocytes, impairing ossification and leading to the signs and symptoms of Larsen syndrome.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Larsen syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: FLNB-Related Disorders  - Genetic Testing Registry: Larsen syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Larsen syndrome, dominant type   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care