Key Points
                    - Laryngeal cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the larynx.    - Use of tobacco products and drinking too much alcohol can affect the risk of laryngeal cancer.    - Signs and symptoms of laryngeal cancer include a sore throat and ear pain.     - Tests that examine the throat and neck are used to help detect (find), diagnose, and stage laryngeal cancer.    - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options.
                
                
                    Laryngeal cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the larynx.
                    The larynx is a part of the throat, between the base of the tongue and the trachea. The larynx contains the vocal cords, which vibrate and make sound when air is directed against them. The sound echoes through the pharynx, mouth, and nose to make a person's voice.   There are three main parts of the larynx:          -  Supraglottis: The upper part of the larynx above the vocal cords, including the epiglottis.    -  Glottis: The middle part of the larynx where the vocal cords are located.    -  Subglottis: The lower part of the larynx between the vocal cords and the trachea (windpipe).         Most laryngeal cancers form in squamous cells, the thin, flat cells lining the inside of the larynx.    Laryngeal cancer is a type of head and neck cancer.
Use of tobacco products and drinking too much alcohol can affect the risk of laryngeal cancer.Anything that increases your risk of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesn't mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your doctor if you think you may be at risk.
Signs and symptoms of laryngeal cancer include a sore throat and ear pain. These and other signs and symptoms may be caused by laryngeal cancer or by other conditions. Check with your doctor if you have any of the following:         - A sore throat or cough that does not go away.    - Trouble or pain when swallowing.    - Ear pain.    - A lump in the neck or throat.    - A change or hoarseness in the voice.
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Prognosis (chance of recovery) depends on the following:         - The stage of the disease.    - The location and size of the tumor.    - The grade of the tumor.    - The patient's age, gender, and general health, including whether the patient is anemic.         Treatment options depend on the following:         - The stage of the disease.    - The location and size of the tumor.    - Keeping the patient's ability to talk, eat, and breathe as normal as possible.    - Whether the cancer has come back (recurred).        Smoking tobacco and drinking alcohol decrease the effectiveness of treatment for laryngeal cancer. Patients with laryngeal cancer who continue to smoke and drink are less likely to be cured and more likely to develop a second tumor. After treatment for laryngeal cancer, frequent and careful follow-up is important.
A laryngeal cleft is a rare abnormality of the separation between the larynx, or voice box, and the esophagus. Normally, when the larynx develops, it is completely separate from the esophagus so swallowed foods go directly into the stomach. When a laryngeal cleft occurs, there is an opening between the larynx and the esophagus so food and liquid can pass through the larynx into the lungs. There are several different types of laryngeal clefts (Types I through IV), classified based on the extent of the clefting.
 The symptoms of laryngeal clefts range from mild stridor to significant difficulties with breathing and swallowing.  Severity of symptoms depends on the severity of the cleft.  Swallowing problems, a husky cry and feeding difficulties are common.  Feeding often causes stridor, coughing, choking, gagging, cyanosis, regurgitation, and frequent respiratory infections.  Many individuals with laryngeal clefts develop chronic lung disease. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Laryngeal cleft. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Laryngomalacia 90% Abnormality of the voice - Aspiration - Cyanosis - Laryngeal stridor - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 During fetal development, the trachea and esophagus begin as one tube.  They later separate when a wall of tissue known as the tracheoesophageal septum forms, dividing the original tube into the trachea and esophagus.  If the tracheoesophageal septum fails to form, the trachea and esophagus may remain open to each other or abnormally shaped, causing abnormalities such as a laryngeal cleft, tracheoesophageal fistula, or esophageal atresia.  Exactly why these abnormalities occur is unknown.
 Medical and feeding therapies are often the first treatments for patients with laryngeal cleft (particularly type I and type II).[4126]  Prevention of gastroesophageal reflux is also important in all types of clefts. Type I clefts often correct themselves over time with growth.  During infancy, nursing in the upright position or thickening of formula may be necessary.  If these treatments are not enough, surgery may be recommended. Different surgical approaches have been proposed for the management of laryngeal cleft. The timing and approach of surgery may differ depending upon the severity of symptoms, associated abnormalities, and type of cleft.
Congenital laryngeal palsy is also known as congenital vocal cord paralysis. It represents 15%-20% of all cases of congenital anomalies of the larynx. It may be bilateral or unilateral. The cause of bilateral paralysis of the vocal cords is often unknown (idiopathic). In some cases, paralysis may be secondary to the immaturity of the nerve or muscle (neuromuscular) or due to central nervous system damage (including the Arnold-Chiari malformation, cerebral palsy, hydrocephalus, myelomeningocele, spina bifida, hypoxia (lack of oxygen in the blood), or bleeding). Birth trauma that causes excessive tension in the neck can cause transient bilateral vocal cord paralysis that can last 6-9 months. Unilateral paralysis is usually idiopathic but can be secondary to problems with the vagus nerve or recurrent laryngeal nerve. Bilateral vocal fold paralysis signals and symptoms may include making a noise when breathing (inspiratory stridor) that worsens upon exercise, progressive obstruction of the respiratory airway, aspiration, recurrent chest infections, cyanosis, nose flaring and signs of cranial nerve deficits during the head and neck exam. Flexible endoscopy usually elucidates the diagnosis by demonstrating vocal fold paralysis and no other abnormality. Treatment may include medication, operations and speech therapy.
 The following online resources provide information on the signs and symptoms of congenital laryngeal paralysis: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders- Vocal Fold Paralysis Medscape Reference - Congenital Malformations of the Larynx
 The cause is often unknown (idiopathic). Congenital bilateral vocal cord paralysis may occur as a result of the immaturity of the nerve or muscle (neuromuscular) or as a result of central nervous system problems, such as Arnold-Chiari syndrome, cerebral palsy, hydrocephalus, myelomeningocele, spine bifida, hypoxia (lack of oxygen in the blood), or bleeding. In other cases the vocal cords' paralysis is acquired. For example, a birth trauma may cause tension in the neck and lead to bilateral vocal cord paralyses that can last 6-9 months. Other causes may include:  Surgical Trauma  Malignancies  Delayed endotracheal intubation  Neurological diseases  Strokes  Choking  Diseases that result in inflammation of the vocal cords or the laryngeal cartilage (Wegener's granulomatosis, sarcoidosis or polychondritis, gout, syphilis and tuberculosis (resulting in mechanical attachment of the vocal cords)  Diabetes mellitus, which may lead to a neuropathy resulting in vocal cord paralysis  Gastroesophageal reflux (GER). The unilateral paralysis is usually idiopathic but may also be secondary to mediastinal lesions, such as tumors or vascular malformations or iatrogenic (caused by damage to the left recurrent laryngeal nerve during surgery in this area, such as heart surgery). It may also result from problems of the mechanical structures of the larynx as the cricoarytenoid joint. The following online resources provide more information on the cause of congenital laryngeal paralysis: American Academy of Otolaringology Medscape Reference - Congenital Malformations of the Larynx
 The following online resources provide information on the diagnosis of congenital laryngeal paralysis: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders- Vocal Fold Paralysis American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA) - Vocal Cord Paralysis Medscape Reference - Congenital Malformations of the Larynx