Mitochondrial DNA-associated Leigh syndrome is a progressive brain disorder that usually appears in infancy or early childhood. Affected children may experience vomiting, seizures, delayed development, muscle weakness, and problems with movement. Heart disease, kidney problems, and difficulty breathing can also occur in people with this disorder. Mitochondrial DNA-associated Leigh syndrome is a subtype of Leigh syndrome and is caused by changes in mitochondrial DNA. Mutations in at least 11 mitochondrial genes have been found to cause mtDNA-associated Leigh syndrome. This condition has an inheritance pattern known as maternal or mitochondrial inheritance. Because mitochondria can be passed from one generation to the next only through egg cells (not through sperm cells), only females pass mitochondrial DNA-associated Leigh syndrome to their children.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Mitochondrial DNA-associated Leigh syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of movement 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Incoordination 90% Muscular hypotonia 90% Nystagmus 90% Respiratory insufficiency 90% Strabismus 90% Ophthalmoparesis 50% Optic atrophy 50% Seizures 50% Abnormal pattern of respiration - Ataxia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - CNS demyelination - Dysarthria - Dystonia - Emotional lability - Failure to thrive - Hepatocellular necrosis - Heterogeneous - Hyperreflexia - Hypertrichosis - Increased CSF lactate - Increased serum lactate - Infantile onset - Intellectual disability - Lactic acidosis - Mitochondrial inheritance - Ophthalmoplegia - Phenotypic variability - Pigmentary retinopathy - Progressive - Ptosis - Respiratory failure - Sensorineural hearing impairment - Spasticity - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Leigh syndrome affects at least 1 in 40,000 newborns. The condition is more common in certain populations. For example, the condition occurs in approximately 1 in 2,000 newborns in the Saguenay Lac-Saint-Jean region of Quebec, Canada.
Leigh syndrome can have different inheritance patterns. It is most commonly inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. This pattern of inheritance applies to genes contained in nuclear DNA. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.  In about 20 to 25 percent of people with Leigh syndrome, the condition is inherited in a mitochondrial pattern, which is also known as maternal inheritance. This pattern of inheritance applies to genes contained in mtDNA. Because egg cells, but not sperm cells, contribute mitochondria to the developing embryo, children can only inherit disorders resulting from mtDNA mutations from their mother. These disorders can appear in every generation of a family and can affect both males and females, but fathers do not pass traits associated with changes in mtDNA to their children. Occasionally, mutations in mtDNA occur spontaneously, and there is no history of Leigh syndrome in the family.  In a small number of affected individuals with mutations in nuclear DNA, Leigh syndrome is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. The condition has this pattern of inheritance when the mutated gene is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Leigh syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Mitochondrial DNA-Associated Leigh Syndrome and NARP  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Nuclear Gene-Encoded Leigh Syndrome Overview  - Genetic Testing Registry: Leigh Syndrome (mtDNA mutation)  - Genetic Testing Registry: Leigh Syndrome (nuclear DNA mutation)  - Genetic Testing Registry: Leigh syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Leigh syndrome, French Canadian type   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care