Lennox-Gastaut syndrome is a form of severe epilepsy that begins in childhood. It is characterized by multiple types of seizures and intellectual disability. This condition can be caused by brain malformations, perinatal asphyxia (lack of oxygen), severe head injury, central nervous system infection and inherited degenerative or metabolic conditions. In about one-third of cases, no cause can be found. Treatment for Lennox-Gastaut syndrome includes anti-epileptic medications such as valproate, lamotrigine, felbamate, or topiramate. There is usually no single antiepileptic medication that will control seizures. Children may improve initially, but many later show tolerance to a drug or develop uncontrollable seizures.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the periventricular white matter - Abnormality of the teeth - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Depressed nasal bridge - Dysphagia - Enlarged cisterna magna - Epileptic encephalopathy - Frontotemporal cerebral atrophy - Gastroesophageal reflux - Generalized myoclonic seizures - Gingival overgrowth - High forehead - Hypoplasia of the corpus callosum - Intellectual disability, progressive - Intellectual disability, severe - Low-set ears - Macrocephaly - Posteriorly rotated ears - Progressive - Ptosis - Recurrent respiratory infections - Tented upper lip vermilion - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome is a severe form of epilepsy. Seizures usually begin before 4 years of age. Seizure types, which vary among patients, include tonic (stiffening of the body, upward deviation of the eyes, dilation of the pupils, and altered respiratory patterns), atonic (brief loss of muscle tone and consciousness, causing abrupt falls), atypical absence (staring spells), and myoclonic (sudden muscle jerks). There may be periods of frequent seizures mixed with brief, relatively seizure-free periods. Most children with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome experience some degree of impaired intellectual functioning or information processing, along with developmental delays, and behavioral disturbances. Lennox-Gastaut syndrome can be caused by brain malformations, perinatal asphyxia, severe head injury, central nervous system infection and inherited degenerative or metabolic conditions. In 30-35 percent of cases, no cause can be found.
Treatment for Lennox-Gastaut syndrome includes clobazam and anti-epileptic medications such as valproate, lamotrigine, felbamate, or topiramate. There is usually no single antiepileptic medication that will control seizures. Children who improve initially may later show tolerance to a drug or have uncontrollable seizures.
The prognosis for individuals with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome varies. There is no cure for the disorder. Complete recovery, including freedom from seizures and normal development, is very unusual.
The NINDS conducts and supports a broad program of basic and clinical research on epilepsy including Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. These studies are aimed at finding the causes of these disorders, improving the diagnosis, and developing new medications and other therapies.
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome affects an estimated 1 in 50,000 to 1 in 100,000 children. This condition accounts for about 4 percent of all cases of childhood epilepsy. For unknown reasons, it appears to be more common in males than in females.
Researchers have not identified any genes specific to Lennox-Gastaut syndrome, although the disorder likely has a genetic component. About two-thirds of cases are described as symptomatic, which means that they are related to an existing neurological problem. Symptomatic Lennox-Gastaut syndrome can be associated with brain injuries that occur before or during birth, problems with blood flow in the developing brain, brain infections, or other disorders affecting the nervous system. The condition can also result from a brain malformation known as cortical dysplasia or occur as part of a genetic disorder called tuberous sclerosis complex. Many people with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome have a history of recurrent seizures beginning in infancy (infantile spasms) or a related condition called West syndrome.  In about one-third of cases, the cause of Lennox-Gastaut syndrome is unknown. When the disorder occurs without an apparent underlying reason, it is described as cryptogenic. Individuals with cryptogenic Lennox-Gastaut syndrome have no history of epilepsy, neurological problems, or delayed development prior to the onset of the disorder.
Most cases of Lennox-Gastaut syndrome are sporadic, which means they occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. However, 3 to 30 percent of people with this condition have a family history of some type of epilepsy. People with the cryptogenic form of Lennox-Gastaut syndrome are more likely than people with the symptomatic form to have a family history of epilepsy.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Lennox-Gastaut syndrome:  - Cleveland Clinic  - Genetic Testing Registry: Epileptic encephalopathy Lennox-Gastaut type  - National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: Diagnosis and Treatment of Epilepsy  - News Release: FDA Approves New Drug to Treat Severe Form of Epilepsy (U.S. Food and Drug Administration, November 20, 2008)   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care