Multiple lentigines syndrome is thought to be a rare condition; approximately 200 cases have been reported worldwide.
Mutations in the PTPN11, RAF1, or BRAF genes cause multiple lentigines syndrome. Approximately 90 percent of individuals with multiple lentigines syndrome have mutations in the PTPN11 gene. RAF1 and BRAF gene mutations are responsible for a total of about 10 percent of cases. A small proportion of people with multiple lentigines syndrome do not have an identified mutation in any of these three genes. In these individuals, the cause of the condition is unknown.  The PTPN11, RAF1, and BRAF genes all provide instructions for making proteins that are involved in important signaling pathways needed for the proper formation of several types of tissue during development. These proteins also play roles in the regulation of cell division, cell movement (migration), and cell differentiation (the process by which cells mature to carry out specific functions).  Mutations in the PTPN11, RAF1, or BRAF genes lead to the production of a protein that functions abnormally. This abnormal functioning impairs the protein's ability to respond to cell signals. A disruption in the regulation of systems that control cell growth and division leads to the characteristic features of multiple lentigines syndrome.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of multiple lentigines syndrome:  - Cincinnati Children's Hospital: Cardiomyopathies  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Noonan Syndrome with Multiple Lentigines  - Genetic Testing Registry: LEOPARD syndrome 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: LEOPARD syndrome 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: LEOPARD syndrome 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care