Lenz microphthalmia syndrome is a genetic disorder that causes abnormal development of the eyes and several other parts of the body.  Eye symptoms vary, but may include underdeveloped (small) or absent eyes, cataract, nystagmus, coloboma (a gap or split in structures that make up the eye), and glaucoma. Eye symptoms may affect one or both eyes and may cause vision loss or blindness.  Other signs and symptoms may include abnormalities of the ears, teeth, hands, skeleton, urinary system and occasionally heart defects.  Around 60% of people with this condition have delayed development or intellectual disability ranging from mild to severe. Mutations in the BCOR gene cause some cases of Lenz microphthalmia syndrome. The other causative gene(s) have yet to be identified. This condition is inherited in an X-linked recessive fashion.
Lenz microphthalmia syndrome is a very rare condition; its incidence is unknown. It has been identified in only a few families worldwide.
Mutations in at least two genes on the X chromosome are thought to be responsible for Lenz microphthalmia syndrome. Only one of these genes, BCOR, has been identified.  The BCOR gene provides instructions for making a protein called the BCL6 corepressor. This protein helps regulate the activity of other genes. Little is known about the protein's function, although it appears to play an important role in early embryonic development. A mutation in the BCOR gene has been found in one family with Lenz microphthalmia syndrome. This mutation changes the structure of the BCL6 corepressor protein, which disrupts the normal development of the eyes and several other organs and tissues before birth.  Researchers are working to determine whether Lenz microphthalmia syndrome is a single disorder with different genetic causes or two very similar disorders, each caused by mutations in a different gene. They are searching for a second gene on the X chromosome that may underlie additional cases of the disorder.
This condition is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. The gene associated with this condition is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Lenz microphthalmia syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Lenz Microphthalmia Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Lenz microphthalmia syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care