There are many treatment options for people with leukemia. The choice of treatment depends on your age and general health, the type of leukemia you have, whether or not it has spread outside the bone marrow, and other factors. If tests show that you have leukemia, you should talk with your doctor and make treatment decisions as soon as possible, although many patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia do not require treatment for many years. Working With a Team of Specialists A team of specialists often treats people with leukemia. The team will keep the primary doctor informed about the patient's progress. The team may include a hematologist who is a specialist in blood and blood-forming tissues, a medical oncologist who is a specialist in cancer treatment, and a radiation oncologist who is a specialist in radiation therapy. Before starting treatment, you may want another doctor to review the diagnosis and treatment plan. Some insurance companies require a second opinion. Others may pay for a second opinion if you or your doctor requests it. Clinical Trials for Leukemia Some leukemia patients take part in studies of new treatments. These studies, called clinical trials, are designed to find out whether a new treatment is safe and effective and better than current treatments. Talk to your doctor if you are interested in taking part in a clinical trial. The U.S. National Institutes of Health, through its National Library of Medicine and other Institutes, maintains a database of clinical trials at ClinicalTrials.gov. Click here to search for current clinical trials on leukemia.
Cancer begins in cells, which make up the blood and other tissues. Normally, cells grow, divide, and produce more cells as needed to keep the body healthy and functioning properly. Sometimes, however, the process of creating a new cell goes wrong -- cells become abnormal and form more cells in an uncontrolled way.
For the most part, no one knows why some people develop leukemia and others do not. Most people who have known risk factors do not get leukemia, while many who get the disease do not have any risk factors. Studies have identified the following risk factors for leukemia. - older age  -  male  - white  - working with certain chemicals  -  smoking  - exposure to very high levels of radiation  - certain health conditions  -  past treatment with chemotherapy or radiation therapy.  older age male white working with certain chemicals smoking exposure to very high levels of radiation certain health conditions past treatment with chemotherapy or radiation therapy.
Common symptoms of leukemia may include -  fevers  - frequent infections  - feeling weak or tired  -  headache  - bleeding and bruising easily  - pain in the bones or joints  -  swelling or discomfort in the abdomen (from an enlarged spleen)  -  swollen lymph nodes, especially in the neck or armpit  - weight loss.  fevers frequent infections feeling weak or tired headache bleeding and bruising easily pain in the bones or joints swelling or discomfort in the abdomen (from an enlarged spleen) swollen lymph nodes, especially in the neck or armpit weight loss. Symptoms of acute leukemia may include vomiting, confusion, loss of muscle control, and seizures.
There are no standard or over-the-counter tests for leukemia. Your doctor can request lab analyses for leukemia that include blood tests that check the levels and types of blood cells and look for changes in the shape of blood cells. The doctor may also look for signs of leukemia in the bone marrow or the fluid around the brain or the spinal cord
Leukemia is cancer of the white blood cells. It is the most common type of childhood cancer. Your blood cells form in your bone marrow. White blood cells help your body fight infection. In leukemia, the bone marrow produces abnormal white blood cells. These cells crowd out the healthy blood cells, making it hard for blood to do its work.    Leukemia can develop quickly or slowly. Acute leukemia is a fast growing type while chronic leukemia grows slowly. Children with leukemia usually have one of the acute types.     Symptoms include       - Infections    - Fever    - Loss of appetite    - Tiredness    - Easy bruising or bleeding    - Swollen lymph nodes    - Night sweats    - Shortness of breath    - Pain in the bones or joints       Risk factors for childhood leukemia include having a brother or sister with leukemia, having certain genetic disorders and having had radiation or chemotherapy. Treatment often cures childhood leukemia. Treatment options include chemotherapy, other drug therapy and radiation. In some cases bone marrow and blood stem cell transplantation might help.     NIH: National Cancer Institute