Oral leukoplakia is a diagnosis of exclusion. It describes a white plaque that does not rub off and cannot be characterized as any other condition. Though it may occur in any part of the mouth, it generally affects the tongue, gums, and inner cheek. Physicians will usually biopsy oral leukoplakia lesions as 20-40% of cases are precancerous or cancerous at the time of biopsy and another 8-15% become cancerous over time. The exact cause of oral leukoplakia is not known. Factors that may increase the risk of developing oral leukoplakia include smoking, alcohol use, vitamin deficiencies, malocclusion, and a weakened immune system.Treatment depends on the biopsy results and the size, appearance, and location of the oral leukoplakia. Removal or ablation of the lesion by surgery, laser, or cryotherapy (use of low temperature) may be recommended.
Leukoplakia is a condition in which thickened, white patches form on the tongue, gums, inside of the cheek, or sometimes on the outer female genitals. Although the sores can vary in appearance, they are usually white or gray; thick; and slightly raised with a hard surface. The condition is thought to be caused by irritation, but the cause is not always known. Tobacco is considered to be the main cause of its development in the mouth. Most patches are benign, but a small percentage show early signs of cancer. Removing the source of irritation may cause the condition to go away, but surgery to remove the sore(s) may be necessary in some cases.
 Early signs of cancer may not be apparent. The clinical appearance of leukoplakia does not generally correlate with its appearance when examined under a microscope. For example, the lesion may appear unchanged for a period of time but may actually show changes when looked at under a microscope. Therefore, a biopsy is typically recommended in all cases to determine which lesions are precancerous. Small lesions may be biopsied and just followed periodically if it is shown to remain benign. However, those that show precancerous or cancerous features should be removed.
 For most people, removing the source of irritation is important and often causes the lesion to disappear. For example, if tobacco use is thought to be the cause, stopping tobacco use usually clears the condition. Dental causes such as rough teeth or fillings should be treated as soon as possible. When this is not effective or if the lesions show early signs of cancer, treatment may include removing the patches. The lesion is usually removed in the health care provider's office using local anesthesia. Leukoplakia on the vulva is treated in the same way as oral lesions. Recurrences are common, so follow-up visits with a physician are recommended.