Key Points
                    - Chronic eosinophilic leukemia is a disease in which too many white blood cells (eosinophils) are made in the bone marrow.    - Signs and symptoms of chronic eosinophilic leukemia include fever and feeling very tired.
                
                
                    Chronic eosinophilic leukemia is a disease in which too many white blood cells (eosinophils) are made in the bone marrow.
                    Eosinophils are white blood cells that react to allergens (substances that cause an allergic response) and help fight infections caused by certain parasites. In chronic eosinophilic leukemia, there are too many eosinophils in the blood, bone marrow, and other tissues. Chronic eosinophilic leukemia may stay the same for many years or it may progress quickly to acute leukemia.
Signs and symptoms of chronic eosinophilic leukemia include fever and feeling very tired. Chronic eosinophilic leukemia may not cause early signs or symptoms. It may be found during a routine blood test. Signs and symptoms may be caused by chronic eosinophilic leukemia or by other conditions. Check with your doctor if you have any of the following:         -  Fever.    - Feeling very tired.    - Cough.    - Swelling under the skin around the eyes and lips, in the throat, or on the hands and feet.    - Muscle pain.    - Itching.    -  Diarrhea.
Treatment of chronic eosinophilic leukemia may include the following:            -  Bone marrow transplant.     -  Biologic therapy using interferon alfa.     - A clinical trial of a new treatment.            Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with chronic eosinophilic leukemia. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. General information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website.
PDGFRB-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia is a type of cancer of blood-forming cells. It is characterized by an elevated number of white blood cells called eosinophils in the blood. These cells help fight infections by certain parasites and are involved in the inflammation associated with allergic reactions. However, these circumstances do not account for the increased number of eosinophils in PDGFRB-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia. Some people with this condition have an increased number of other types of white blood cells, such as neutrophils or mast cells, in addition to eosinophils. People with this condition can have an enlarged spleen (splenomegaly) or enlarged liver (hepatomegaly). Some affected individuals develop skin rashes, likely as a result of an abnormal immune response due to the increased number of eosinophils.
The exact prevalence of PDGFRB-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia is unknown. For unknown reasons, males are up to nine times more likely than females to develop PDGFRB-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia.
PDGFRB-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia is caused by genetic rearrangements that join part of the PDGFRB gene with part of another gene. At least 20 genes have been found that fuse with the PDGFRB gene to cause PDGFRB-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia. The most common genetic abnormality in this condition results from a rearrangement (translocation) of genetic material that brings part of the PDGFRB gene on chromosome 5 together with part of the ETV6 gene on chromosome 12, creating the ETV6-PDGFRB fusion gene.  The PDGFRB gene provides instructions for making a protein that plays a role in turning on (activating) signaling pathways that control many cell processes, including cell growth and division (proliferation). The ETV6 gene provides instructions for making a protein that turns off (represses) gene activity. This protein is important in development before birth and in regulating blood cell formation. The protein produced from the ETV6-PDGFRB fusion gene, called ETV6/PDGFR, functions differently than the proteins normally produced from the individual genes. Like the normal PDGFR protein, the ETV6/PDGFR fusion protein turns on signaling pathways. However, the fusion protein does not need to be turned on to be active, so the signaling pathways are constantly turned on (constitutively activated). The fusion protein is unable to repress gene activity regulated by the normal ETV6 protein, so gene activity is increased. The constitutively active signaling pathways and abnormal gene activity increase the proliferation and survival of cells.  When the ETV6-PDGFRB fusion gene mutation occurs in cells that develop into blood cells, the growth of eosinophils (and occasionally other blood cells, such as neutrophils and mast cells) is poorly controlled, leading to PDGFRB-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia. It is unclear why eosinophils are preferentially affected by this genetic change.
PDGFRB-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia is not inherited and occurs in people with no history of the condition in their families. Chromosomal rearrangements that lead to a PDGFRB fusion gene are somatic mutations, which are mutations acquired during a person's lifetime and present only in certain cells. The somatic mutation occurs initially in a single cell, which continues to grow and divide, producing a group of cells with the same mutation (a clonal population).
These resources address the diagnosis or management of PDGFRB-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia:  - Cancer.Net: Leukemia--Eosinophilic: Treatment  - Genetic Testing Registry: Myeloproliferative disorder, chronic, with eosinophilia  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Eosinophil Count--Absolute  - Seattle Cancer Care Alliance: Hypereosinophilia   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
PDGFRA-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia is a form of blood cell cancer characterized by an elevated number of cells called eosinophils in the blood. These cells help fight infections by certain parasites and are involved in the inflammation associated with allergic reactions. However, these circumstances do not account for the increased number of eosinophils in PDGFRA-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia.  Another characteristic feature of PDGFRA-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia is organ damage caused by the excess eosinophils. Eosinophils release substances to aid in the immune response, but the release of excessive amounts of these substances causes damage to one or more organs, most commonly the heart, skin, lungs, or nervous system. Eosinophil-associated organ damage can lead to a heart condition known as eosinophilic endomyocardial disease, skin rashes, coughing, difficulty breathing, swelling (edema) in the lower limbs, confusion, changes in behavior, or impaired movement or sensations. People with PDGFRA-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia can also have an enlarged spleen (splenomegaly) and elevated levels of certain chemicals called vitamin B12 and tryptase in the blood.  Some people with PDGFRA-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia have an increased number of other types of white blood cells, such as neutrophils or mast cells. Occasionally, people with PDGFRA-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia develop other blood cell cancers, such as acute myeloid leukemia or B-cell or T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia or lymphoblastic lymphoma.  PDGFRA-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia is often grouped with a related condition called hypereosinophilic syndrome. These two conditions have very similar signs and symptoms; however, the cause of hypereosinophilic syndrome is unknown.
PDGFRA-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia is a rare condition; however, the exact prevalence is unknown.
PDGFRA-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia is caused by mutations in the PDGFRA gene. This condition usually occurs as a result of genetic rearrangements that fuse part of the PDGFRA gene with part of another gene. Rarely, changes in single DNA building blocks (point mutations) in the PDGFRA gene are found in people with this condition. Genetic rearrangements and point mutations affecting the PDGFRA gene are somatic mutations, which are mutations acquired during a person's lifetime that are present only in certain cells. The somatic mutation occurs initially in a single cell, which continues to grow and divide, producing a group of cells with the same mutation (a clonal population).  The most common genetic abnormality in PDGFRA-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia results from a deletion of genetic material from chromosome 4, which brings together part of the PDGFRA gene and part of the FIP1L1 gene, creating the FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion gene.  The FIP1L1 gene provides instructions for a protein that plays a role in forming the genetic blueprints for making proteins (messenger RNA or mRNA).  The PDGFRA gene provides instructions for making a receptor protein that is found in the cell membrane of certain cell types. Receptor proteins have specific sites into which certain other proteins, called ligands, fit like keys into locks. When the ligand attaches (binds), the PDGFRA receptor protein is turned on (activated), which leads to activation of a series of proteins in multiple signaling pathways. These signaling pathways control many important cellular processes, such as cell growth and division (proliferation) and cell survival.  The FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion gene (as well as other PDGFRA fusion genes) provides instructions for making a fusion protein that has the function of the normal PDGFRA protein. However, the fusion protein does not require ligand binding to be activated. Similarly, point mutations in the PDGFRA gene can result in a PDGFRA protein that is activated without ligand binding. As a result, the signaling pathways are constantly turned on (constitutively activated), which increases the proliferation and survival of cells. When the FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion gene mutation or point mutations in the PDGFRA gene occur in blood cell precursors, the growth of eosinophils (and occasionally other blood cells, such as neutrophils and mast cells) is poorly controlled, leading to PDGFRA-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia. It is unclear why eosinophils are preferentially affected by this genetic change.
PDGFRA-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia is not inherited and occurs in people with no history of the condition in their families. Mutations that lead to a PDGFRA fusion gene and PDGFRA point mutations are somatic mutations, which means they occur during a person's lifetime and are found only in certain cells. Somatic mutations are not inherited. Males are more likely to develop PDGFRA-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia than females because, for unknown reasons, PDGFRA fusion genes are found more often in males.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of PDGFRA-associated chronic eosinophilic leukemia:  - Cancer.Net: Leukemia - Eosinophilic: Treatment  - Genetic Testing Registry: Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Eosinophil Count - Absolute  - Seattle Cancer Care Alliance: Hypereosinophilia   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care