A leukodystrophy is a type of rare genetic disorder that affects the brain, spinal cord, and other nerves in the body. It is caused by destruction of the white matter of the brain. The white matter degrades due to defects of the myelin, which is a fatty covering that insulates nerves in the brain. Myelin is needed to protect the nerves and the nerves can't function normally without it. These disorders are progressive, meaning they tend to get worse with time. The leukodystrophies are a group of disorders caused by spelling mistakes (mutations) in the genes involved in making myelin. Specific leukodystrophies include metachromatic leukodystrophy, Krabbe leukodystrophy, X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy, Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease, Canavan disease, and Alexander disease. The most common symptom of a leukodystrophy is a decline in functioning of an infant or child who previously appeared healthy. This gradual loss may be seen with issues in body tone, movements, gait, speech, ability to eat, vision, hearing, and behavior.
Metachromatic leukodystrophy is an inherited condition characterized by the accumulation of fats called sulfatides in cells, especially cells of the nervous system. This accumulation results in progressive destruction of white matter of the brain, which consists of nerve fibers covered by myelin. Affected individuals experience progressive deterioration of intellectual functions and motor skills, such as the ability to walk. They also develop loss of sensation in the extremities, incontinence, seizures, paralysis, inability to speak, blindness, and hearing loss. Eventually they lose awareness of their surroundings and become unresponsive. This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern and is caused by mutations in the ARSA and PSAP genes.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Metachromatic leukodystrophy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Behavioral abnormality 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Decreased nerve conduction velocity 90% Developmental regression 90% Gait disturbance 90% Genu recurvatum 90% Incoordination 90% Muscle weakness 90% Neurological speech impairment 90% Peripheral neuropathy 90% Reduced consciousness/confusion 90% Seizures 90% Amaurosis fugax 50% Hyperreflexia 50% Hypertonia 50% Limitation of joint mobility 50% Muscular hypotonia 50% Nystagmus 50% Optic atrophy 50% Aganglionic megacolon 7.5% Ataxia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Babinski sign - Bulbar palsy - Cholecystitis - Chorea - Delusions - Dysarthria - Dystonia - EMG: neuropathic changes - Emotional lability - Gallbladder dysfunction - Hallucinations - Hyporeflexia - Increased CSF protein - Intellectual disability - Loss of speech - Mental deterioration - Peripheral demyelination - Progressive peripheral neuropathy - Spastic tetraplegia - Tetraplegia - Urinary incontinence - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
How  Metachromatic leukodystrophy is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that both copies of the disease-causing gene in each cell must have a mutation for an individual to be affected. Individuals inherit two copies of each gene - one copy from each parent. Typically, an individual is affected because they inherited a mutated copy of the gene from each parent. Individuals with one mutated copy of the gene (such as an unaffected parent of an affected individual) are referred to as carriers; carriers typically do not have any signs or symptoms of the condition. When two carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) chance to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) chance to be a carrier like each of the parents, and a 25% chance to not have the condition and not be a carrier.
 If someone has a family history of metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) or someone is known to be a carrier for MLD, individuals who are biologically related to the affected individual or carrier are at risk to be a carrier. Generally speaking, the more closely related an individual is to the affected individual or carrier, the greater the chance for that person to be a carrier. Prior to genetic testing, the chance to be a carrier for some biological relatives of an affected individual are as follows: Parent of affected individual: assumed to be 100% (called an obligate carrier) Unaffected sibling of affected individual: 2 in 3 (~66.6%) Aunt or uncle of affected individual: 1 in 2 (50%) First cousin of affected individual: 1 in 4 (25%) If someone has carrier testing and is found to be negative (not a carrier), that person's children are typically assumed to be negative also. More information about the use of genetic carrier testing is available on GeneTests' Web site and can be viewed by clicking here. Individuals who are interested in learning about genetic testing and about their specific risk to be a carrier should speak with a genetics professional.
Treatment for most of the leukodystrophies is symptomatic and supportive, and may include medications, physical, occupational, and speech therapies; and nutritional, educational, and recreational programs. Bone marrow transplantation is showing promise for a few of the leukodystrophies.
The prognosis for the leukodystrophies varies according to the specific type of leukodystrophy.
The NINDS supports research on genetic disorders, including the leukodystrophies. The goals of this research are to increase scientific understanding of these disorders, and to find ways to prevent, treat, and, ultimately, cure them.
Metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) is one of a group of genetic disorders called the leukodystrophies, which are characterized by the toxic buildup of lipids (fatty materials such as oils and waxes) and other storage materials in cells in the white matter of the central nervous system and peripheral nerves. The buildup of storage materials impairs the growth or development of the myelin sheath, the fatty covering that acts as an insulator around nerve fibers. (Myelin, which lends its color to the white matter of the brain, is a complex substance made up of a mixture of fats and proteins.) MLD is one of several lipid storage diseases, which result in the harmful buildup of lipids in brain cells and other cells and tissues in the body. People with lipid storage diseases either do not produce enough of one of the enzymes needed to break down (metabolize) lipids or they produce enzymes that do not work properly. Some leukodystrophies are caused by genetic defects of enzymes that regulate the metabolism of fats needed in myelin synthesis. MLD, which affects males and females, is cause by a deficiency of the enzyme arylsulfatase A. MLD has three characteristic forms: late infantile, juvenile, and adult. Late infantile MLD typically begins between 12 and 20 months following birth. Infants appear normal at first but develop difficulty walking after the first year of life and eventually lose the ability to walk. Other symptoms include muscle wasting and weakness,developmental delays, progressive loss of vision leading to blindness, impaired swallowing, and dementia before age 2. Most children with this form of MLD die by age 5. Symptoms of the juvenile form of MLD (which begins between 3-10 years of age) include impaired school performance, mental deterioration, an inability to control movements, seizures, and dementia. Symptoms continue to get worse, and death eventually occurs 10 to 20 years following disease onset.. The adult form commonly begins after age 16, with symptoms that include psychiatric disturbances, seizures, tremor, impaired concentration, depression, and dementia. Death generally occurs within 6 to 14 years after onset of symptoms.
There is no cure for MLD. Bone marrow transplantation may delay progression of the disease in some infantile-onset cases. Other treatment is symptomatic and supportive. Considerable progress has been made with regard to gene therapy in an animal model of MLD and in clinical trials.
The prognosis for MLD is poor. Most children within the infantile form die by age 5. Symptoms of the juvenile form progress with death occurring 10 to 20 years following onset. Those persons affected by the adult form typically die withing 6 to 14 years following onset of symptoms.
The mission of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) is to seek fundamental knowledge of the brain and nervous system and to use that knowledge to reduce the burden of neurological disease. The NINDS is a part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the leading supporter of biomedical research in the world. Research funded by the NINDS focuses on better understanding how neurological defects arise in lipid storage disorders and on the development of new treatments targeting disease mechanisms, including gene therapies, cell-based therapies, and pharmacological approaches. NINDS-funded preclinical research aims to study the effectiveness and safety of virus-based delivery of the normal ARSA gene to promote gene expression throughout the central nervous system and overcome the mutation-caused deficiency. If successful, the project could lead to trials in humans. Other research hopes to study the use of patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cells (cells that are capable of becoming other types of cells) in correcting the gene deficiency in metachromatic leukodystrophy.
Metachromatic leukodystrophy is reported to occur in 1 in 40,000 to 160,000 individuals worldwide. The condition is more common in certain genetically isolated populations: 1 in 75 in a small group of Jews who immigrated to Israel from southern Arabia (Habbanites), 1 in 2,500 in the western portion of the Navajo Nation, and 1 in 8,000 among Arab groups in Israel.
Most individuals with metachromatic leukodystrophy have mutations in the ARSA gene, which provides instructions for making the enzyme arylsulfatase A. This enzyme is located in cellular structures called lysosomes, which are the cell's recycling centers. Within lysosomes, arylsulfatase A helps break down sulfatides. A few individuals with metachromatic leukodystrophy have mutations in the PSAP gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is broken up (cleaved) into smaller proteins that assist enzymes in breaking down various fats. One of these smaller proteins is called saposin B; this protein works with arylsulfatase A to break down sulfatides.  Mutations in the ARSA or PSAP genes result in a decreased ability to break down sulfatides, resulting in the accumulation of these substances in cells. Excess sulfatides are toxic to the nervous system. The accumulation gradually destroys myelin-producing cells, leading to the impairment of nervous system function that occurs in metachromatic leukodystrophy.  In some cases, individuals with very low arylsulfatase A activity show no symptoms of metachromatic leukodystrophy. This condition is called pseudoarylsulfatase deficiency.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of metachromatic leukodystrophy:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Arylsulfatase A Deficiency  - Genetic Testing Registry: Metachromatic leukodystrophy  - Genetic Testing Registry: Sphingolipid activator protein 1 deficiency   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care