Lichen planus pigmentosus (LPP) is a rare form of lichen planus. It is characterized by oval or irregularly shaped brown to gray-brown macules and patches on the skin. Areas that are exposed to sun such as the forehead, temples and neck are most commonly affected. However, the macules and patches may also develop on the trunk or in places where two areas of skin touch or rub together (i.e. the armpit, groin, etc). LPP is a chronic, relapsing condition with periods of exacerbations (worsening symptoms) separated by periods of remission (a decrease in or disappearance of symptoms). Although the exact underlying cause of LPP is unknown, studies suggest that UV light, viral infections, and certain topical (applied to the skin) agents such as mustard oil and amla oil, may trigger the condition. Treatment for LPP is symptomatic.
 Lichen planus pigmentosus (LPP), a rare form of lichen planus, is characterized by oval or irregularly shaped brown to gray-brown macules and patches on the skin. Areas that are exposed to sun such as the forehead, temples and neck are most commonly affected. However, the macules and patches may also develop on the trunk or in places where two areas of skin touch or rub together (i.e. the armpit, groin, etc). LPP is a chronic, relapsing condition with periods of exacerbations (worsening symptoms) separated by periods of remission (a decrease in or disappearance of symptoms). Although the skin findings of LPP are usually not associated with any additional symptoms, some affected people may experience mild itching and/or burning or develop other features of lichen planus. Please click here to learn more about the signs and symptoms that may be found in lichen planus. LPP usually affects young to middle-aged adults who have dark skin, especially those of Indian, Latin American, and the Middle Eastern descent.
 The exact underlying cause of lichen planus pigmentosus is currently unknown. However, studies suggest that the condition may be triggered by viral infections, UV light or the application of certain oils on the hair or skin (i.e. mustard oil, amla oil).
 A diagnosis of lichen planus pigmentosus is usually suspected based on the presence of characteristic signs and symptoms. A skin biopsy may then be ordered to confirm the diagnosis.
 Treatment for lichen planus pigmentosus is generally symptomatic and may include: Topical (applied to the skin) corticosteroids Topical calcineurin inhibitors (medications that are typically used to treat eczema) Skin lightening agents Laser therapy
Oral lichen planus is a inflammatory condition that affects the inside of the mouth.  Signs and symptoms include patches of fine white lines and dots most commonly in the inside of the cheeks, gums, and/or tongue. Most people with lichen planus experience no to few symptoms, others may have painful sores or ulcers in the mouth. Severe lichen planus slightly increases the risk for oral cancer. Oral lichen planus may occur alone or in combination with other skin forms of lichen planus.
 It is important to identify and remove any potential agent that might have caused a lichenoid reaction. Chemicals or medications associated with development of lichen planus include gold, antibiotics, arsenic, iodides, chloroquine, quinacrine, quinidine, antimony, phenothiazines, diuretics such as chlorothiazide, and many others.[2483] Consideration regarding role of drugs that were started in recent months prior to the on set of oral lichen planus, as well as any contact allergens identified by patch testing is recommended. Symptoms may improve with the following measures: Meticulous oral hygiene Stopping smoking Topical steroids as drops, pastes, gels or sprays (e.g., triamcinolone paste) Steroid injections (intralesional triamcinolone) Mouth rinse containing the calcineurin inhibitors: cyclosporin or tacrolimus In severe cases systemic corticosteroids may be used. Other possible therapeutic agents may include: Thalidomide Systemic retinoids (acitretin or isotretinoin) Griseofulvin Azathioprine Cyclophosphamide Dapsone Metronidazole Low molecular weight heparin
Annular atrophic lichen planus (LP) is a rare form of lichen planus, which is a condition that affects the skin and/or mouth. In annular atrophic LP, specifically, affected people develop skin lesions with features of both annular LP and atrophic LP - ring-shaped, slightly raised, purple lesions with central atrophy (tissue breakdown). Although these lesions can be found anywhere on the body, they most commonly affect the trunk and legs. The exact underlying cause of annular atrophic LP is unknown. Treatment is not always necessary as some cases of annular atrophic LP resolve on their own. Mild cases that are diagnosed early can often be managed with topical steroids, while more intensive therapies may be required for severe cases.