Hepatic lipase deficiency is a rare condition that is characterized by increased levels of certain fats (known as triglycerides and cholesterol) in the blood. Affected people may also have increased levels of high-density lipoproteins (HDLs) and decreased levels of low-density lipoproteins (LDLs), which are two molecules that help transport fats throughout the body. Hepatic lipase deficiency may be associated with an increased risk of developing atherosclerosis and/or heart disease; however, additional research is needed on the long-term outlook of people with this condition. Hepatic lipase deficiency is caused by changes (mutations) in the LIPC gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hepatic lipase deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Angina pectoris - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Eruptive xanthomas - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Lipase deficiency combined. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of metabolism/homeostasis - Autosomal recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Hepatic lipase deficiency is a disorder that affects the body's ability to break down fats (lipids). People with this disorder have increased amounts of certain fats, known as triglycerides and cholesterol, in the blood. These individuals also have increased amounts of molecules known as high-density lipoproteins (HDLs) and decreased amounts of molecules called low-density lipoproteins (LDL). These molecules transport triglycerides and cholesterol throughout the body. In people with hepatic lipase deficiency, the LDL molecules are often abnormally large.  Normally, high levels of HDL (known as "good cholesterol") and low levels of LDL (known as "bad cholesterol") are protective against an accumulation of fatty deposits on the artery walls (atherosclerosis) and heart disease. However, some individuals with hepatic lipase deficiency, who have this imbalance of HDL and LDL, develop atherosclerosis and heart disease in mid-adulthood, while others do not. It is unknown whether people with hepatic lipase deficiency have a greater risk of developing atherosclerosis or heart disease than individuals in the general population. Similarly, it is unclear how increased blood triglycerides and cholesterol levels affect the risk of atherosclerosis and heart disease in people with hepatic lipase deficiency.
Hepatic lipase deficiency is likely a rare disorder; only a few affected families have been reported in the scientific literature.
Hepatic lipase deficiency is caused by mutations in the LIPC gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called hepatic lipase. This enzyme is produced by liver cells and released into the bloodstream where it helps convert very low-density lipoproteins (VLDLs) and intermediate-density lipoproteins (IDLs) to LDLs. The enzyme also assists in transporting HDLs that carry cholesterol and triglycerides from the blood to the liver, where the HDLs deposit these fats so they can be redistributed to other tissues or removed from the body.  LIPC gene mutations prevent the release of hepatic lipase from the liver or decrease the enzyme's activity in the bloodstream. As a result, VLDLs and IDLs are not efficiently converted into LDLs, and HDLs carrying cholesterol and triglycerides remain in the bloodstream. It is unclear what effect this change in lipid levels has on people with hepatic lipase deficiency.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of hepatic lipase deficiency:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hepatic lipase deficiency  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Cholesterol Testing and Results  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Triglyceride Level   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care