Lipoid proteinosis (LP) of Urbach and Wiethe is a rare condition that affects the skin and the brain. The signs and symptoms of this condition and the disease severity vary from person to person. The first sign of LP is usually a hoarse cry during infancy. Affected children then develop characteristic growths on the skin and mucus membranes in the first two years of life. Damage to the temporal lobes (the portions of the brain that process emotions and are important for short-term memory) occurs over time and can lead to seizures and intellectual disability. Other signs and symptoms may include hair loss, oligodontia, speech problems, frequent upper respiratory infections, difficulty swallowing, dystonia, and learning disabilities. LP is caused by changes (mutations) in the ECM1 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. There is currently no cure for LP and treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Lipoid proteinosis of Urbach and Wiethe. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal blistering of the skin 90% Abnormality of the eye 90% Abnormality of the voice 90% Acne 90% Atypical scarring of skin 90% Pustule 90% Thick lower lip vermilion 90% Abnormal hair quantity 50% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the tongue 50% Feeding difficulties in infancy 50% Hyperkeratosis 50% Recurrent respiratory infections 50% Verrucae 50% Cerebral calcification 7.5% Nasal polyposis 7.5% Seizures 7.5% Abnormality of the skin - Aggressive behavior - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Bilateral intracranial calcifications - Hallucinations - Hoarse voice - Memory impairment - Paranoia - Patchy alopecia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 There is currently no cure for lipoid proteinosis (LP) of Urbach and Wiethe. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person. The skin abnormalities found in people affected by LP may be treated with certain medications, including corticosteriods, dimethyl sulfoxide; or d-penicillamine. An additional medication called acitretin can be used to treat hoarseness and some skin problems. Anticonvulsant medications are often prescribed for people with seizures. The success of these medications in treating the signs and symptoms of LP varies. Affected people with growths on their vocal cords or eyelids may be treated with carbon dioxide laser surgery. Dermabrasion (removal of the top layer of skin) may also improve the appearance of skin abnormalities.
Lipoid proteinosis (LP) is a rare disease that affects the skin and the brain. Three distinctive features characterize the disease: a hoarse voice, unusual growths on the skin and mucus membranes, and damage to the temporal lobes or hippocampus of the brain. The symptoms of LP may begin as early as infancy with hoarseness or a weak cry, due to growths on the vocal cords. Skin lesions appear sometime in the next 3 years, leaving acne- or pox-like scars on the face, hands, and mucous membranes. The most characteristic symptom of LP is waxy, yellow, bead-like bumps along the upper and lower edges of the eyelids. Brain damage develops over time and is associated with the development of cognitive abilities and epileptic seizures. Damage to the amygdala, a part of the brain that regulates emotions and perceptions, leads to difficulties in discriminating facial expressions and in making realistic judgments about the trustworthiness of other people. LP is a hereditary disease that equally affects males and females. Nearly a quarter of all reported cases have been in the Afrikaner population of South Africa, but the disease is increasingly being reported from other parts of the world including India. The gene responsible for LP has recently been identified. It performs an unknown function in the skin related to the production of collagen.
There is no cure for LP. Some doctors have had success treating the skin eruptions with oral steroid drugs and oral dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO). Carbon dioxide laser surgery of thickened vocal cords and eyelid bumps has proved helpful in some studies. Dermabrasion may improve the appearance of the skin lesions. Seizures, if present, may be treated with anticonvulsants.
Lipoid proteinosis has a stable or slowly progressive course. Children with LP may have behavioral or learning difficulties, along with seizures. Obstruction in the throat may require a tracheostomy. Mortality rates in infants and adults are slightly increased because of problems with throat obstructions and upper respiratory tract infections.
The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), and other institutes of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), conduct research related to neurological diseases such as lipoid proteinosis in laboratories at the NIH, and also support additional research through grants to major medical institutions across the country. Much of this research focuses on finding better ways to prevent, treat, and ultimately cure disorders, such as lipoid proteinosis.