 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Loeys-Dietz syndrome type 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Absent distal phalanges 5% Arnold-Chiari malformation 5% Atria septal defect 5% Bicuspid aortic valve 5% Bicuspid pulmonary valve 5% Cerebral aneurysm 5% Cleft palate 5% Craniosynostosis 5% Descending aortic aneurysm 5% Disproportionate tall stature 5% Hydrocephalus 5% Inguinal hernia 5% Intellectual disability 5% Mitral valve prolapse 5% Osteoporosis 5% Postaxial polydactyly 5% Syndactyly 5% Umbilical hernia 5% Abnormality of the sternum - Arachnodactyly - Ascending aortic aneurysm - Ascending aortic dissection - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Bifid uvula - Blue sclerae - Brachydactyly syndrome - Camptodactyly - Dermal translucency - Exotropia - Generalized arterial tortuosity - Hypertelorism - Joint contracture of the hand - Joint laxity - Malar flattening - Patent ductus arteriosus - Proptosis - Pulmonary artery aneurysm - Retrognathia - Scoliosis - Talipes equinovarus - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Loeys-Dietz syndrome is a connective tissue disorder that causes aortic aneurysms, widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism), cleft palate and/or split uvula (the little piece of flesh that hangs down in the back of the mouth) and twisting or spiraled arteries (arterial tortuosity). Other findings include craniosynostosis, extropia (eyes that turn outward), micrognathia, structural brain abnormalities, intellectual deficit, and congenital heart disease. Signs and symptoms vary among individuals. This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner with variable clinical expression. This condition is called Loeys-Dietz syndrome type 1 when affected individuals have cleft palate, craniosynostosis, and/or hypertelorism. Individuals without these features are said to have Loeys-Dietz syndrome type 2. The disease is caused by mutations in the TGFBR1, the TGFBR2,  the SMAD3 or the TGFB2 genes. It is important to have an early and adequate treatment for the heart problems because the chance for aortic dissection and other vascular problems may be high in some patients. Many specialists may be involved for the best managment of the patient.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Loeys-Dietz syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Aneurysm 90% Aortic dissection 90% Arterial dissection 90% Dilatation of the ascending aorta 90% Patent ductus arteriosus 90% Pes planus 90% Uterine rupture 90% Arachnodactyly 50% Atypical scarring of skin 50% Blue sclerae 50% Camptodactyly of finger 50% Cleft palate 50% Disproportionate tall stature 50% Hypoplasia of the zygomatic bone 50% Scoliosis 50% Striae distensae 50% Abnormality of coagulation 7.5% Craniosynostosis 7.5% Joint dislocation 7.5% Joint hypermobility 7.5% Pectus carinatum 7.5% Pectus excavatum 7.5% Sudden cardiac death 7.5% Thin skin 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Loeys-Dietz syndrome type 4. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Bicuspid aortic valve 5% Emphysema 5% Hypertelorism 5% Pneumothorax 5% Spondylolisthesis 5% Talipes equinovarus 5% Abnormality of the sternum - Aortic dissection - Arachnodactyly - Arterial tortuosity - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Bruising susceptibility - Dural ectasia - High palate - Inguinal hernia - Joint hyperflexibility - Mitral valve prolapse - Pes planus - Retrognathia - Scoliosis - Tall stature - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The prevalence of Loeys-Dietz syndrome is unknown. Loeys-Dietz syndrome types I and II appear to be the most common forms.
The four types of Loeys-Dietz syndrome are distinguished by their genetic cause: mutations in the TGFBR1 gene cause type I, mutations in the TGFBR2 gene cause type II, mutations in the SMAD3 gene cause type III, and mutations in the TGFB2 gene cause type IV. These four genes play a role in cell signaling that promotes growth and development of the body's tissues. This signaling pathway also helps with bone and blood vessel development and plays a part in the formation of the extracellular matrix, an intricate lattice of proteins and other molecules that forms in the spaces between cells.  Mutations in the TGFBR1, TGFBR2, TGFB2, and SMAD3 genes result in the production of proteins with little or no function. Even though these proteins have severely reduced function, cell signaling occurs at an even greater intensity than normal. Researchers speculate that the activity of proteins in this signaling pathway is increased to compensate for the protein whose function is reduced; however, the exact mechanism responsible for the increase in signaling is unclear. The overactive signaling pathway disrupts the development of connective tissue, the extracellular matrix, and various body systems, leading to the varied signs and symptoms of Loeys-Dietz syndrome.
Loeys-Dietz syndrome is considered to have an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  In about 75 percent of cases, this disorder results from a new gene mutation and occurs in people with no history of the disorder in their family. In other cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Loeys-Dietz syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Loeys-Dietz Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Loeys-Dietz syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Loeys-Dietz syndrome 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Loeys-Dietz syndrome 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Loeys-Dietz syndrome 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Loeys-Dietz syndrome 4  - Johns Hopkins Medicine: Diagnosis of Craniosynostosis  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Aortic Dissection  - National Heart Lung and Blood Institute: How Is an Aneurysm Treated?   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care