Approximately 17 percent, or 36 million, of American adults say that they have some degree of hearing loss. Hearing loss is a common condition in older adults. Roughly one-third of Americans 65 to 74 years of age and 47 percent of those 75 and older have hearing loss.
Presbycusis is common in older adults. Presbycusis comes on gradually as a person ages and mostly affects people over 50. Doctors do not know why presbycusis happens, but it seems to run in families. Presbycusis may make it hard for a person to tolerate loud sounds or to hear what others are saying. This type of hearing loss involves damage to the inner ear and is permanent. Tinnitus, also common in older people, is the ringing, roaring, clicking, hissing, or buzzing sound in the ears frequently caused by presbycusis, exposure to loud noise or certain medications. Tinnitus can accompany any type of hearing loss. It also can be a sign of other important health problems, too, such as allergies and problems in the heart and blood vessels. Tinnitus may come and go, or stop altogether.
Hearing loss can result from taking certain medications. "Ototoxic" medications damage the inner ear, sometimes permanently. Check with your doctor if you notice a problem while taking a medication.
Washing your hands frequently can help prevent upper respiratory infections, which can lead to an ear infection called otitis media. The ear infection otitis media can be a cause of long-term hearing loss. Also, ask your doctor about a yearly flu shot to help prevent flu-related ear infections. If you still get an ear infection, see a doctor immediately before it becomes more serious.
Assistive Listening Devices  Assistive listening devices devices can help you hear in certain listening environments. These can include telephone and cell phone amplifying devices, smart phone or tablet "apps," and closed circuit systems (induction coil loops) in places of worship, theaters, and auditoriums. TV listening systems help you listen to the television or the radio without being bothered by other noises around you. Some hearing aids can be plugged into televisions or stereos to help you hear better.  Cochlear Implant If your hearing loss is severe and of a certain type, your doctor may suggest that you talk to an otolaryngologist about a cochlear implant. An otolaryngologist is a surgeon who specializes in ear, nose, and throat diseases. A cochlear implant is a small electronic device that the surgeon places under the skin and behind the ear. The device picks up sounds, changes them to electrical signals, and sends them past the non-working part of the inner ear and on to the brain. Hearing through a cochlear implant sounds different from normal hearing, but it lets many people communicate orally in person and over the telephone, and perceive sounds in the environment.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Congenital ectodermal dysplasia with hearing loss. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal hair quantity 90% Camptodactyly of finger 90% Sensorineural hearing impairment 90% Short stature 90% Arachnodactyly 50% Carious teeth 50% Coarse hair 50% Cognitive impairment 50% Hyperkeratosis 50% Kyphosis 50% Scoliosis 50% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia - Joint contracture of the hand - Thoracic scoliosis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Epiphyseal dysplasia hearing loss dysmorphism. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal dermatoglyphics 90% Abnormality of the wrist 90% Anteverted nares 90% Behavioral abnormality 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Delayed skeletal maturation 90% Depressed nasal bridge 90% Epicanthus 90% Facial asymmetry 90% Hypertelorism 90% Hypopigmented skin patches 90% Proximal placement of thumb 90% Seizures 90% Sensorineural hearing impairment 90% Short stature 90% Wide mouth 90% Abnormality of the genital system 50% Deep philtrum 50% Finger syndactyly 50% Long philtrum 50% Ptosis 50% Scoliosis 50% Abnormal localization of kidney 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Sudden sensorineural deafness is a condition that is characterized by rapid, unexplained hearing loss. More specifically, affected people experience a reduction in hearing of greater than 30 decibels, which may occur all at once or over several days. In most cases, only one ear is affected. People with sudden sensorineural deafness often become dizzy, have ringing in their ears (tinnitus), or both (40% of the cases). The condition has a variety of causes, including infection, inflammation, tumors, trauma, exposure to toxins and conditions that affect the inner ear such as Mnire's disease. About half of people with sudden sensorineural deafness will recover some or all of their hearing spontaneously and about 85% of those who receive treatment will recover some of their hearing.
Nonsyndromic hearing loss is a partial or total loss of hearing that is not associated with other signs and symptoms. In contrast, syndromic hearing loss occurs with signs and symptoms affecting other parts of the body.  Nonsyndromic hearing loss can be classified in several different ways. One common way is by the condition's pattern of inheritance: autosomal dominant (DFNA), autosomal recessive (DFNB), X-linked (DFNX), or mitochondrial (which does not have a special designation). Each of these types of hearing loss includes multiple subtypes. DFNA, DFNB, and DFNX subtypes are numbered in the order in which they were first described. For example, DFNA1 was the first type of autosomal dominant nonsyndromic hearing loss to be identified. The various inheritance patterns of nonsyndromic hearing loss are described in more detail below.  The characteristics of nonsyndromic hearing loss vary among the different types. Hearing loss can affect one ear (unilateral) or both ears (bilateral). Degrees of hearing loss range from mild (difficulty understanding soft speech) to profound (inability to hear even very loud noises). The term "deafness" is often used to describe severe-to-profound hearing loss. Hearing loss can be stable, or it may be progressive, becoming more severe as a person gets older. Particular types of nonsyndromic hearing loss show distinctive patterns of hearing loss. For example, the loss may be more pronounced at high, middle, or low tones.  Most forms of nonsyndromic hearing loss are described as sensorineural, which means they are associated with a permanent loss of hearing caused by damage to structures in the inner ear. The inner ear processes sound and sends the information to the brain in the form of electrical nerve impulses. Less commonly, nonsyndromic hearing loss is described as conductive, meaning it results from changes in the middle ear. The middle ear contains three tiny bones that help transfer sound from the eardrum to the inner ear. Some forms of nonsyndromic hearing loss, particularly a type called DFNX2, involve changes in both the inner ear and the middle ear. This combination is called mixed hearing loss.  Depending on the type, nonsyndromic hearing loss can become apparent at any time from infancy to old age. Hearing loss that is present before a child learns to speak is classified as prelingual or congenital. Hearing loss that occurs after the development of speech is classified as postlingual.
Between 2 and 3 per 1,000 children in the United States are born with detectable hearing loss in one or both ears. The prevalence of hearing loss increases with age; the condition affects 1 in 8 people in the United States age 12 and older, or about 30 million people. By age 85, more than half of all people experience hearing loss.
As discussed above, nonsyndromic hearing loss has different patterns of inheritance. Between 75 and 80 percent of cases are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. Usually, each parent of an individual with autosomal recessive hearing loss carries one copy of the mutated gene but does not have hearing loss.  Another 20 to 25 percent of nonsyndromic hearing loss has an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. Most people with autosomal dominant hearing loss inherit an altered copy of the gene from a parent who also has hearing loss.  Between 1 and 2 percent of cases have an X-linked pattern of inheritance. A condition is considered X-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes in each cell. Males with X-linked nonsyndromic hearing loss tend to develop more severe hearing loss earlier in life than females who inherit a copy of the same gene mutation. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.  Mitochondrial forms of the condition, which result from changes to mtDNA, account for less than 1 percent of all nonsyndromic hearing loss in the United States. These cases are inherited in a mitochondrial pattern, which is also known as maternal inheritance. This pattern of inheritance applies to genes contained in mtDNA. Because egg cells, but not sperm cells, contribute mitochondria to the developing embryo, children can only inherit disorders resulting from mtDNA mutations from their mother. These disorders can appear in every generation of a family and can affect both males and females, but fathers do not pass traits associated with changes in mtDNA to their children.  In some cases, hearing loss occurs in people with no history of the condition in their family. These cases are described as sporadic, and the cause of the hearing loss is often unknown. When hearing loss results from environmental factors, it is not inherited.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of nonsyndromic hearing loss:  - Baby's First Test: Hearing Loss  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview  - Genetic Testing Registry: Deafness, X-linked  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary hearing loss and deafness  - Genetic Testing Registry: Non-syndromic genetic deafness  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Age-related hearing loss  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Audiology  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hearing loss  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hearing or speech impairment - resources   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care