Lujan syndrome is a condition characterized by intellectual disability, behavioral problems, and poor muscle tone (hypotonia). Affected people also tend to have characteristic physical features such as a tall and thin body; a large head (macrocephaly); and a thin face with distinctive facial features (prominent top of the nose, short space between the nose and the upper lip, narrow roof of the mouth, crowded teeth and a small chin). Most of the cases occur in males. Lujan syndrome is caused by changes (mutations) in the MED12 gene and is inherited in an X-linked manner. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person and may include special education; physical therapy, occupational therapy, and speech therapy for developmental delays; and medications to control seizures.
Lujan syndrome appears to be an uncommon condition, but its prevalence is unknown.
Lujan syndrome is caused by at least one mutation in the MED12 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that helps regulate gene activity; it is involved in many aspects of early development. The MED12 gene mutation that causes Lujan syndrome changes a single protein building block (amino acid) in the MED12 protein. This genetic change alters the structure, and presumably the function, of the MED12 protein. However, it is unclear how the mutation affects development and leads to the cognitive and physical features of Lujan syndrome.
This condition is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. The gene associated with this condition is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Lujan syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: MED12-Related Disorders  - Genetic Testing Registry: X-linked mental retardation with marfanoid habitus syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care