Interstitial lung disease is the name for a large group of diseases that inflame or scar the lungs. The inflammation and scarring make it hard to get enough oxygen. The scarring is called pulmonary fibrosis.    Breathing in dust or other particles in the air is responsible for some types of interstitial lung diseases. Specific types include       - Black lung disease among coal miners, from inhaling coal dust    - Farmer's lung, from inhaling farm dust    - Asbestosis, from inhaling asbestos fibers    - Siderosis, from inhaling iron from mines or welding fumes    - Silicosis, from inhaling silica dust       Other causes include autoimmune diseases or occupational exposures to molds, gases, or fumes. Some types of interstitial lung disease have no known cause.    Treatment depends on the type of exposure and the stage of the disease. It may involve medicines, oxygen therapy, or a lung transplant in severe cases.
When you breathe, your lungs take in oxygen from the air and deliver it to the bloodstream. The cells in your body need oxygen to work and grow. During a normal day, you breathe nearly 25,000 times. People with lung disease have difficulty breathing. Millions of people in the U.S. have lung disease. If all types of lung disease are lumped together, it is the number three killer in the United States.    The term lung disease refers to many disorders affecting the lungs, such as asthma, COPD, infections like influenza, pneumonia and tuberculosis, lung cancer, and many other breathing problems. Some lung diseases can lead to respiratory failure.    Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health
Significant exposure to asbestos fibers causes asbestos-related lung diseases. "Significant" usually means you were exposed for at least several months to visible dust from the fibers.
                
Asbestos fibers are very small. When you breathe in, they can get stuck deep in your lungs. The fibers remain in your lung tissue for a long time and may cause scarring and inflammation. This can lead to pleural plaque and widespread pleural thickening, pleural effusion, asbestosis, lung cancer, or mesothelioma.
                
Generally, asbestos-related lung diseases develop 10 to 40 or more years after a person has been exposed to asbestos.
                
Being around products that contain asbestos isn't a danger, as long as the asbestos is enclosed. This prevents the fibers from getting into the air.
The signs and symptoms of asbestos-related lung diseases vary. They depend on which disease you have and how much it has damaged your lungs. Signs and symptoms may not appear for 10 to 40 or more years after exposure to asbestos.
                
If you have pleural plaque, you may not have any signs or symptoms. Pleural effusion may cause pain on one side of the chest. Both conditions often are found with a chest x ray. These conditions may occur earlier than other asbestos-related lung diseases.
                
The main symptom of asbestosis is shortness of breath with physical exertion. You also may have a dry cough and feel tired. If your doctor listens to your lungs with a stethoscope, he or she may hear a crackling sound when you breathe in.
                
The symptoms of lung cancer may include a worsening cough or a cough that won't go away, trouble breathing, ongoing chest pain, and coughing up blood. Other symptoms of lung cancer include frequent lung infections, fatigue (tiredness), and weight loss without a known cause.
                
Symptoms of mesothelioma include shortness of breath and chest pain due to pleural effusion.
No treatments can reverse the effects of asbestos on your lungs. However, treatments may help relieve symptoms and prevent or delay complications. If you have lung cancer, treatments may help slow the progress of the disease.
                
Treatments for Pleural Plaque, Pleural Effusion, and Asbestosis
                
If you have pleural plaque, pleural effusion, or asbestosis and you smoke, your doctor will advise you to quit smoking. People who have these conditions can lower their risk for lung cancer if they quit smoking.
                
Talk with your doctor about programs and products that can help you quit smoking. Also, try to avoid secondhand smoke.
                
If you have trouble quitting smoking on your own, consider joining a support group. Many hospitals, workplaces, and community groups offer classes to help people quit smoking.
                
For more information about how to quit smoking, go to the Diseases and Conditions Index Smoking and Your Heart article and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institutes Your Guide to a Healthy Heart. Although these resources focus on heart health, they include general information about how to quit smoking.
                
If you have trouble breathing or shortness of breath and a very low blood oxygen level, your doctor may recommend oxygen therapy. For this treatment, you're given oxygen through nasal prongs or a mask. Oxygen therapy may be done at home or in a hospital or other health facility.
                
If excess fluid around the lungs (pleural effusion) is making it hard for you to breathe, thoracentesis (THOR-ah-sen-TE-sis) may help. For this procedure, your doctor will insert a thin needle or plastic tube into the space between your lungs and chest wall. He or she will then draw out the excess fluid.
                
Treatments for Lung Cancer and Mesothelioma
                
If you have lung cancer or mesothelioma, your treatment may include surgery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and/or targeted therapy. (Targeted therapy uses medicines or other substances to find and attack specific lung cancer cells without harming normal cells.)
                
Your doctor may prescribe medicines to prevent fluid buildup, ease pain, or relieve other complications of your disease.
                
If you have lung cancer or mesothelioma, talk with your doctor about whether you should get flu and pneumonia vaccines. These vaccines can help lower your risk for lung infections.
You can prevent asbestos-related lung diseases by limiting your exposure to asbestos fibers. If your job requires you to work around asbestos, make sure to follow workplace rules for handling it. For example, make sure that air levels are measured, and wear a proper respirator to avoid breathing in asbestos fibers.
                
If you live in a house or work in a building that has pipes or other products containing asbestos, you generally dont need to take special precautions. Being around products that contain asbestos isnt a danger, as long as the asbestos is enclosed. This prevents the fibers from getting into the air.
                
If you smoke, quit. Smoking greatly increases your risk of lung cancer if you have pleural plaque, pleural effusion, or asbestosis. Talk with your doctor about programs and products that can help you quit smoking. Also, try to avoid secondhand smoke.
                
If you have trouble quitting smoking on your own, consider joining a support group. Many hospitals, workplaces, and community groups offer classes to help people quit smoking.
                
For more information about how to quit smoking, go to the Diseases and Conditions Index Smoking and Your Heart article and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institutes Your Guide to a Healthy Heart. Although these resources focus on heart health, they include general information about how to quit smoking.