Lyme disease is a bacterial infection you get from the bite of an infected tick. The first symptom is usually a rash, which may look like a bull's eye. As the infection spreads, you may have       - A fever    - A headache    - Muscle and joint aches    - A stiff neck    - Fatigue       Lyme disease can be hard to diagnose because you may not have noticed a tick bite. Also, many of its symptoms are like those of the flu and other diseases. In the early stages, your health care provider will look at your symptoms and medical history, to figure out whether you have Lyme disease. Lab tests may help at this stage, but may not always give a clear answer. In the later stages of the disease, a different lab test can confirm whether you have it.    Antibiotics can cure most cases of Lyme disease. The sooner treatment begins, the quicker and more complete the recovery.    After treatment, some patients may still have muscle or joint aches and nervous system symptoms. This is called post-Lyme disease syndrome (PLDS). Long-term antibiotics have not been shown to help with PLDS. However, there are ways to help with the symptoms of PLDS, and most patients do get better with time.    NIH: National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases
Lyme disease is the most common tickborne infectious disease in the United States. Early signs and symptoms of the condition include fever, chills, muscle pain, headache, and joint pain. As the condition progresses, affected people may experience heart problems, Bell's palsy, arthritis, abnormal muscle movement, speech problems and cognitive (thinking) abnormalities. Please visit the Center for Disease Control and Prevention's Web site for a more comprehensive list of symptoms. Lyme disease is caused by the bacterium Borrelia burgdorferi, which is transmitted to humans through the bite of infected blacklegged ticks. Certain features of the condition, including whether or not an affected person will develop medication-resistant chronic arthritis, is thought to be influenced by genetic factors (certain human leukocyte antigen genes). Treatment generally includes antibiotics to address the bacterial infection and other medications (i.e. pain medications) to relieve symptoms.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Lyme disease. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Hypermelanotic macule 90% Arthritis 50% Cranial nerve paralysis 50% Joint swelling 50% Meningitis 50% Abnormality of temperature regulation 7.5% Amaurosis fugax 7.5% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the skin 7.5% Arrhythmia 7.5% Arthralgia 7.5% Encephalitis 7.5% Inflammatory abnormality of the eye 7.5% Insomnia 7.5% Memory impairment 7.5% Migraine 7.5% Muscle weakness 7.5% Myalgia 7.5% Nausea and vomiting 7.5% Paresthesia 7.5% Photophobia 7.5% Skin rash 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.