The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, familial, 3. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Reduced natural killer cell activity 13/13 Anemia 12/14 Granulocytopenia 11/14 Autosomal recessive inheritance - Fever - Hemophagocytosis - Hepatosplenomegaly - Hypertriglyceridemia - Hypofibrinogenemia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a condition in which the body makes too many activated immune cells (macrophages and lymphocytes). People with HLH usually develop symptoms within the first months or years of life which may include fever, enlarged liver or spleen, cytopenia (lower-than-normal number of blood cells), and neurological abnormalities. HLH may be inherited in an autosomal recessive manner or it can have non-genetic causes in which case it is called acquired HLH. There are five subtypes of inherited HLH which are designated familial HLH, types 1-5. Each subtype is caused by a change (mutation) in a different gene. The genetic cause of type 1 is currently unknown. Types 2-5 are caused by mutations in the PRF1 gene, the UNC13D gene, the STX11 gene and the STXBP2 gene, respectively. Treatment depends on a number of factors, including the severity of symptoms, the age of onset, and the underlying cause of the condition.
 There are inherited and non-inherited (acquired) causes of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). There are five subtypes of inherited HLH which are designated familial HLH, types 1-5. Each subtype is caused by a change (mutation) in a different gene that helps regulate the immune system. The genetic cause of familial HLH, type 1 is currently unknown. Familial HLH, type 2 is caused by mutations in the PRF1 gene. Familial HLH, type 3 is caused by mutations in the UNC13D gene. Familial HLH, type 4 is caused by mutations in the STX11 gene. Familial HLH, type 5 is caused by mutations in the STXBP2 gene.  All of the genes that cause HLH serve as the instructions for proteins that help destroy or turn off activated immune cells that are no longer needed. Changes in these genes lead to an overproduction of immune cells which results in an excessive immune response and the many signs and symptoms of familial HLH. The acquired causes of HLH include: infection, medications that suppress the immune system, autoimmune diseases, immunodeficiencies, certain types of cancer and/or metabolic diseases.
 Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) may be inherited or acquired (due to non-genetic factors). Familial HLH is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that to be affected, a person must have a change (mutation) in both copies of the responsible gene in each cell. The parents of an affected person usually each carry one mutated copy of the gene and are referred to as carriers. Carriers typically do not show signs or symptoms of the condition. When two carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be a carrier like each of the parents, and a 25% chance to not have the condition and not be a carrier. Acquired HLH is not inherited. The non-genetic causes of HLH include: infection, medications that suppress the immune system, autoimmune diseases, immunodeficiencies, certain types of cancer and/or metabolic diseases.
 Yes. Clinical genetic testing is available for the four genes known to cause familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, types 2-5. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal testing are possible if the two disease-causing mutations in the family are known. Molecular genetic testing is not available for familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, type 1 because the genetic cause is currently unknown. Genetic testing is not available for acquired HLH because it is caused by non-genetic factors. The Genetic Testing Registry (GTR) is a centralized online resource for information about genetic tests. The intended audience for the GTR is health care providers and researchers. Patients and consumers with specific questions about a genetic test should contact a health care provider or a genetics professional. How is hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis diagnosed? A diagnosis of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is based on the presence of certain signs and symotoms. A person is considered affected by this condition if they have at least five of the following symptoms: Fever Enlarged spleen Cytopenia (lower-than-normal number of blood cells) Elevated levels of triglycerides or fibrinogen in the blood Hemophagocytosis (the destruction of certain types of blood cells by histiocytes) on bone marrow, spleen or lymph node biopsy Decreased or absent NK cell activity High levels of ferritin in the blood Elevated blood levels of CD25 (a measure of prolonged immune cell activation) The diagnosis of familial HLH, types 2-5 can be confirmed with genetic testing.
 The best treatment options for hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) are determined by a number of factors, including the severity of symptoms, the age of onset, and the underlying cause of the condition. In acquired HLH, it is often necessary to treat the underlying condition. For example, antiobiotics or antiviral medications can be used to treat or prevent infections that may have triggered the exaggerated immune response. Allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation is considered a cure for familial HLH. It is often recommended that people with confirmed or suspected familial HLH undergo this treatment as early in life as possible. Prior to hematopoietic cell transplanation, affected people are usually treated with chemotherapy and/or immunotherapy to destroy excess immune cells which can lead to life-threatening inflammation.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, familial, 4. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Muscular hypotonia 5% Seizures 5% Anemia 7/7 Hepatomegaly 7/7 Hypertriglyceridemia 5/5 Splenomegaly 7/7 Hemophagocytosis 6/7 Thrombocytopenia 6/7 Increased serum ferritin 3/4 Neutropenia 5/7 Hypofibrinogenemia 3/5 Autosomal recessive inheritance - Fever - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis is a disorder in which the immune system produces too many activated immune cells (lymphocytes) called T cells, natural killer cells, B cells, and macrophages (histiocytes). Excessive amounts of immune system proteins called cytokines are also produced. This overactivation of the immune system causes fever and damages the liver and spleen, resulting in enlargement of these organs.  Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis also destroys blood-producing cells in the bone marrow, a process called hemophagocytosis. As a result, affected individuals have low numbers of red blood cells (anemia) and a reduction in the number of blood cells involved in clotting (platelets). A reduction in platelets may cause easy bruising and abnormal bleeding.  The brain may also be affected in familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. As a result, affected individuals may experience irritability, delayed closure of the bones of the skull in infants, neck stiffness, abnormal muscle tone, impaired muscle coordination, paralysis, blindness, seizures, and coma. In addition to neurological problems, familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis can cause abnormalities of the heart, kidneys, and other organs and tissues. Affected individuals also have an increased risk of developing cancers of blood-forming cells (leukemia and lymphoma).  Signs and symptoms of familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis usually become apparent during infancy, although occasionally they appear later in life. They usually occur when the immune system launches an exaggerated response to an infection, but may also occur in the absence of infection. Without treatment, most people with familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis survive only a few months.
Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis occurs in approximately 1 in 50,000 individuals worldwide.
Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis may be caused by mutations in any of several genes. These genes provide instructions for making proteins that help destroy or deactivate lymphocytes that are no longer needed. By controlling the number of activated lymphocytes, these genes help regulate immune system function.  Approximately 40 to 60 percent of cases of familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis are caused by mutations in the PRF1 or UNC13D genes. Smaller numbers of cases are caused by mutations in other known genes. In some affected individuals, the genetic cause of the disorder is unknown.  The gene mutations that cause familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis impair the body's ability to regulate the immune system. These changes result in the exaggerated immune response characteristic of this condition.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis, Familial  - Genetic Testing Registry: Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, familial, 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, familial, 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, familial, 4  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, familial, 5  - The Merck Manual for Healthcare Professionals  - University of Minnesota: Pediatric Blood & Marrow Transplantation Center   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care