Key Points
                    - Primary central nervous system (CNS) lymphoma is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the lymph tissue of the brain and/or spinal cord.    - Having a weakened immune system may increase the risk of developing primary CNS lymphoma.     - Tests that examine the eyes, brain, and spinal cord are used to detect (find) and diagnose primary CNS lymphoma.    - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options.
                
                
                    Primary central nervous system (CNS) lymphoma is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the lymph tissue of the brain and/or spinal cord.
                    Lymphoma is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the lymph system. The lymph system is part of the immune system and is made up of the lymph, lymph vessels, lymph nodes, spleen, thymus, tonsils, and bone marrow. Lymphocytes (carried in the lymph) travel in and out of the central nervous system (CNS). It is thought that some of these lymphocytes become malignant and cause lymphoma to form in the CNS. Primary CNS lymphoma can start in the brain, spinal cord, or meninges (the layers that form the outer covering of the brain). Because the eye is so close to the brain, primary CNS lymphoma can also start in the eye (called ocular lymphoma).
Having a weakened immune system may increase the risk of developing primary CNS lymphoma. Anything that increases your chance of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesnt mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your doctor if you think you may be at risk.    Primary CNS lymphoma may occur in patients who have acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) or other disorders of the immune system or who have had a kidney transplant. For more information about lymphoma in patients with AIDS, see the PDQ summary on AIDS-Related Lymphoma Treatment.
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) depends on the following:         - The patient's age and general health.     - The level of certain substances in the blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).    - Where the tumor is in the central nervous system, eye, or both.    - Whether the patient has AIDS.         Treatment options depend on the following:          - The stage of the cancer.    - Where the tumor is in the central nervous system.    - The patient's age and general health.    - Whether the cancer has just been diagnosed or has recurred (come back).        Treatment of primary CNS lymphoma works best when the tumor has not spread outside the cerebrum (the largest part of the brain) and the patient is younger than 60 years, able to carry out most daily activities, and does not have AIDS or other diseases that weaken the immune system.