Lymphedema distichiasis syndrome is a condition that affects the normal function of the lymphatic system (part of the immune system that produces and transports fluids and immune cells throughout the body). People with this condition are born with extra eyelashes (distichiasis) and develop puffiness or swelling (lymphedema) of the limbs by the time they are in their forties. The abnormal eyelashes, which grow along the inner lining of the eyelid, often touch the eyeball and can cause damage to the clear covering of the eye (cornea). Other eye problems such as an irregular curvature of the cornea causing blurred vision (astigmatism) or scarring of the cornea may also occur. Other health problems, varicose veins, droopy eyelids (ptosis), heart abnormalities, and an opening in the roof of the mouth (a cleft palate), may also be present. Lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome is caused by mutations in the FOXC2 gene. This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Corneal erosion 90% Distichiasis 90% Photophobia 90% Cataract 50% Muscle weakness 50% Ptosis 50% Abnormality of the pulmonary vasculature 7.5% Arrhythmia 7.5% Benign neoplasm of the central nervous system 7.5% Diabetes mellitus 7.5% Glomerulopathy 7.5% Patent ductus arteriosus 7.5% Proteinuria 7.5% Recurrent urinary tract infections 7.5% Renal duplication 7.5% Sarcoma 7.5% Skin ulcer 7.5% Webbed neck 7.5% Cleft palate 4% Cleft upper lip 4% Abnormality of the musculature - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Conjunctivitis - Corneal ulceration - Lymphedema - Predominantly lower limb lymphedema - Recurrent corneal erosions - Tetralogy of Fallot - Varicose veins - Ventricular septal defect - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome is a condition that affects the normal function of the lymphatic system, which is a part of the circulatory and immune systems. The lymphatic system produces and transports fluids and immune cells throughout the body. People with lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome develop puffiness or swelling (lymphedema) of the limbs, typically the legs and feet. Another characteristic of this syndrome is the growth of extra eyelashes (distichiasis), ranging from a few extra eyelashes to a full extra set on both the upper and lower lids. These eyelashes do not grow along the edge of the eyelid, but out of its inner lining. When the abnormal eyelashes touch the eyeball, they can cause damage to the clear covering of the eye (cornea). Related eye problems can include an irregular curvature of the cornea causing blurred vision (astigmatism) or scarring of the cornea. Other health problems associated with this disorder include swollen and knotted (varicose) veins, droopy eyelids (ptosis), heart abnormalities, and an opening in the roof of the mouth (a cleft palate).  All people with lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome have extra eyelashes present at birth. The age of onset of lymphedema varies, but it most often begins during puberty. Males usually develop lymphedema earlier than females, but all affected individuals will develop lymphedema by the time they are in their forties.
The prevalence of lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome is unknown. Because the extra eyelashes can be overlooked during a medical examination, researchers believe that some people with this condition may be misdiagnosed as having lymphedema only.
Lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome is caused by mutations in the FOXC2 gene. The FOXC2 gene provides instructions for making a protein that plays a critical role in the formation of many organs and tissues before birth. The FOXC2 protein is a transcription factor, which means that it attaches (binds) to specific regions of DNA and helps control the activity of many other genes. Researchers believe that the FOXC2 protein has a role in a variety of developmental processes, such as the formation of veins and the development of the lungs, eyes, kidneys and urinary tract, cardiovascular system, and the transport system for immune cells (lymphatic vessels).
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Lymphedema-Distichiasis Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Distichiasis-lymphedema syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Lymph System   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care