Lymphedema is the name of a type of swelling. It happens when lymph builds up in your body's soft tissues. Lymph is a fluid that contains white blood cells that defend against germs. It can build up when the lymph system is damaged or blocked. It usually happens in the arms or legs.    Causes of lymphedema include       - Infection    - Cancer    - Scar tissue from radiation therapy or surgical removal of lymph nodes    - Inherited conditions in which lymph nodes or vessels are absent or abnormal       Treatment can help control symptoms. It includes exercise, compression devices, skin care, and massage.    NIH: National Cancer Institute
Hereditary lymphedema type II is a primary lymphedema that results from abnormal transport of lymph fluid. Individuals with this condition usually develop swelling in the lower legs and feet during puberty. Some affected individuals develop a non-contagious skin infection called cellulitis, which can further damage the lymphatic vessels (the thin tubes that carry lymph fluid). While the cause of hereditary lymphedema type II is unknown, it is thought to be genetic because it tends to run in families. It appears to have an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance.
 Hereditary lymphedema type II is characterized by the abnormal transport of lymph fluid. This causes the lymph fluid to build up, causing swelling (lymphedema). Individuals with hereditary lymphedema type II usually develop swelling in the lower legs and feet during puberty. Some affected individuals develop a non-contagious skin infection called cellulitis, which can further damage the lymphatic vessels (the thin tubes that carry lymph fluid).    The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hereditary lymphedema type II. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Cleft palate 7.5% Yellow nails 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Hypoplasia of lymphatic vessels - Predominantly lower limb lymphedema - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The cause of hereditary lymphedema type II is unknown. The condition is thought to be genetic because it tends to run in families. Researchers have studied many genes associated with the lymphatic system; however, to date, no specific genetic change has been associated with this type of lymphedema.
How  Hereditary lymphedema type II appears to have an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, which means that one copy of an altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. People with hereditary lymphedema type II usually have at least one other affected family member, in most cases, a parent. When the condition occurs in only one person in a family, the condition is described as Meige-like lymphedema.