Waldenstrm macroglobulinemia affects an estimated 3 per million people each year in the United States. Approximately 1,500 new cases of the condition are diagnosed each year in this country, and whites are more commonly affected than African Americans. For unknown reasons, the condition occurs twice as often in men than women.
Waldenstrm macroglobulinemia is thought to result from a combination of genetic changes. The most common known genetic change associated with this condition is a mutation in the MYD88 gene, which is found in more than 90 percent of affected individuals. Another gene commonly associated with Waldenstrm macroglobulinemia, CXCR4, is mutated in approximately 30 percent of affected individuals (most of whom also have the MYD88 gene mutation). Other genetic changes believed to be involved in Waldenstrm macroglobulinemia have not yet been identified. Studies have found that certain regions of DNA are deleted or added in some people with the condition; however, researchers are unsure which genes in these regions are important for development of the condition. The mutations that cause Waldenstrm macroglobulinemia are acquired during a person's lifetime and are present only in the abnormal blood cells.  The proteins produced from the MYD88 and CXCR4 genes are both involved in signaling within cells. The MyD88 protein relays signals that help prevent the self-destruction (apoptosis) of cells, thus aiding in cell survival. The CXCR4 protein stimulates signaling pathways inside the cell that help regulate cell growth and division (proliferation) and cell survival. Mutations in these genes lead to production of proteins that are constantly functioning (overactive). Excessive signaling through these overactive proteins allows survival and proliferation of abnormal cells that should undergo apoptosis, which likely contributes to the accumulation of lymphoplasmacytic cells in Waldenstrm macroglobulinemia.
Waldenstrm macroglobulinemia is usually not inherited, and most affected people have no history of the disorder in their family. The condition usually arises from mutations that are acquired during a person's lifetime (somatic mutations), which are not inherited.  Some families seem to have a predisposition to the condition. Approximately 20 percent of people with Waldenstrm macroglobulinemia have a family member with the condition or another disorder involving abnormal B cells.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Waldenstrm macroglobulinemia:  - American Cancer Society: How is Waldenstrom Macroglobulinemia Diagnosed?  - American Cancer Society: How is Waldenstrom Macroglobulinemia Treated?  - Genetic Testing Registry: Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia  - MD Anderson Cancer Center  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Macroglobulinemia of Waldenstrom   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care