Adult-onset vitelliform macular dystrophy (AVMD) is an eye disorder that can cause progressive vision loss. AVMD affects an area of the retina called the macula, which is responsible for sharp central vision. The condition causes a fatty yellow pigment to accumulate in cells underlying the macula, eventually damaging the cells. Signs and symptoms usually begin between ages 30 and 50 and include blurred and/or distorted vision, which can progress to central vision loss over time.Historically, AVMD has been characterized as a genetic disorder caused by mutations in the PRPH2, BEST1, IMPG1, and IMPG2 genes; however, recent studies focused on genetic testing suggest that there may be other unidentified genes and/or environmental causes.The majority of cases due to a mutation in the identified genes are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner; however not all individuals have AVMD have a family history and not all individuals who inherit a causative gene mutation develop symptoms.
 Historically, adult-onset vitelliform macular dystrophy (AVMD) was defined as a genetic disorder; however, recent studies have concluded that only a minority of cases have an identified genetic cause, suggesting that there might be other underlying causes of environmental origin, genetic origin, or a mix of genetics and environment (multifactorial).  More studies are needed to better define other underlying causes that might be present, whether of genetic or environmental origin.  Currently known genetic causes include mutations in the PRPH2, BEST1, IMPG1, and IMPG2 genes. It is additionally suspected that AVMD might be associated with a single-nucleotide polymorphism (variant DNA sequence) in the HTRA1 gene. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the HTRA1 gene are additionally associated with age-related macular degeneration.
How  The majority of cases with an identified family history or genetic cause are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that in order to be affected, a person only needs a change (mutation) in one copy of the responsible gene in each cell. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from an affected parent. Other cases may result from a new (de novo) mutation in the gene. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. When caused by a known mutation inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, a person with adult-onset macular dystrophy (AVMD) has a 50% chance with each pregnancy of passing along the altered gene to his or her child.  The inheritance pattern of AVMD can be confusing as not all individuals with AVMD have a family history and not all individuals who inherit a causative gene mutation develop symptoms.
 Management for this condition should include a comprehensive eye examination, including dilation, once or twice a year to rule out any possible complications. If vision is impaired, patients should be referred for low vision testing and rehabilitation. Intravitreal injections of either Ranibizumab or Bevacizumab may be effective in the short-term. Transcorneal electrical stimulation has also been found to improve visual acuity in individuals with this condition.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Macular dystrophy, atypical vitelliform. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Reduced visual acuity 5% Visual field defect 5% Visual impairment 5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Late onset - Macular dystrophy - Vitelliform-like macular lesions - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Best vitelliform macular dystrophy (BVMD) is a slowly progressive form of macular degeneration. It usually begins in childhood or adolescence, but age of onset and severity of vision loss can vary. Affected people first have normal vision, followed by decreased central visual acuity and distorted vision (metamorphopsia). Peripheral vision is not affected. BVMD is usually inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, but autosomal recessive inheritance has been reported. The condition is typically caused by mutations in the BEST1 gene; in a few cases the cause is unknown. Treatment is symptomatic and involves the use of low vision aids.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Best vitelliform macular dystrophy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the macula 90% Visual impairment 90% Abnormality of color vision 50% Choroideremia 7.5% Visual field defect 7.5% Abnormal electroretinogram - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Cystoid macular degeneration - Macular dystrophy - Reduced visual acuity - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Best vitelliform macular dystrophy (BVMD) is caused by changes (mutations) in the BEST1 gene. This gene gives the body instructions for making a protein called bestrophin. Bestrophin acts as a channel that controls the movement of chloride ions within the retina. It is thought that mutations in the BEST1 gene affect the shape of the channel and its ability to properly regulate the flow of chloride. However, it is unclear how exactly this relates to the specific features of BVMD.
How  Best vitelliform macular dystrophy (BVMD) is most commonly inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, although a few cases with autosomal recessive inheritance have been reported. In autosomal dominant inheritance, having one changed (mutated) copy of the responsible gene in each cell is enough to cause symptoms of the condition. When a person with an autosomal dominant condition has children, each child has a 50% (1 in 2) chance to inherit the mutated gene. Most people with BVMD have an affected parent, but some people have the condition as the result of a new mutation that occurred for the first time. Autosomal recessive inheritance means that a person must have a mutation in both copies of the responsible gene in each cell to be affected. The parents of an affected person usually each carry one mutated copy of the gene and are referred to as carriers. Carriers typically do not show signs or symptoms of the condition. When two carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be a carrier like each of the parents, and a 25% chance to not have the condition and not be a carrier.
 Best vitelliform macular dystrophy (BVMD) may be diagnosed based on the findings on an exam of the fundus (the interior surface of the eye opposite the lens); an electrooculogram (EOG); and the family history. An eye exam may include other tests as well. A fundus exam may show a typical yellow yolk-like macular lesion. An EOG is usually abnormal in affected people, but occasionally, people with signs of BVMD and a mutation in the BEST1 gene have a normal EOG. The family history in affected people is often consistent with either autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive inheritance. Genetic testing may also be used to make a diagnosis of BVMD. A BEST1 mutation is detected in about 96% of affected people who have an affected family member. In people with no family history of BVMD, the mutation detection rate ranges between 50-70%. The exact type of genetic test ordered to confirm a diagnosis may depend on a person's ancestry, family history, and/or whether other eye disorders are also being considered.
 There is no specific treatment for Best vitelliform macular dystrophy (BVMD) at this time. Low vision aids help affected people with significant loss of visual acuity. Laser photocoagulation, photodynamic therapy, and anti-VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) agents such as bevacizumab have shown limited success in treating some of the secondary features of BVMD such as choroidal neovascularization (when abnormal blood vessels grow under the macula and retina).
Vitelliform macular dystrophy is a genetic eye disorder that can cause progressive vision loss. This disorder affects the retina, the specialized light-sensitive tissue that lines the back of the eye. Specifically, vitelliform macular dystrophy disrupts cells in a small area near the center of the retina called the macula. The macula is responsible for sharp central vision, which is needed for detailed tasks such as reading, driving, and recognizing faces.  Vitelliform macular dystrophy causes a fatty yellow pigment (lipofuscin) to build up in cells underlying the macula. Over time, the abnormal accumulation of this substance can damage cells that are critical for clear central vision. As a result, people with this disorder often lose their central vision, and their eyesight may become blurry or distorted. Vitelliform macular dystrophy typically does not affect side (peripheral) vision or the ability to see at night.  Researchers have described two forms of vitelliform macular dystrophy with similar features. The early-onset form (known as Best disease) usually appears in childhood; the onset of symptoms and the severity of vision loss vary widely. The adult-onset form begins later, usually in mid-adulthood, and tends to cause vision loss that worsens slowly over time. The two forms of vitelliform macular dystrophy each have characteristic changes in the macula that can be detected during an eye examination.
Vitelliform macular dystrophy is a rare disorder; its incidence is unknown.
Mutations in the BEST1 and PRPH2 genes cause vitelliform macular dystrophy. BEST1 mutations are responsible for Best disease and for some cases of the adult-onset form of vitelliform macular dystrophy. Changes in the PRPH2 gene can also cause the adult-onset form of vitelliform macular dystrophy; however, less than a quarter of all people with this form of the condition have mutations in the BEST1 or PRPH2 gene. In most cases, the cause of the adult-onset form is unknown.  The BEST1 gene provides instructions for making a protein called bestrophin. This protein acts as a channel that controls the movement of charged chlorine atoms (chloride ions) into or out of cells in the retina. Mutations in the BEST1 gene probably lead to the production of an abnormally shaped channel that cannot properly regulate the flow of chloride. Researchers have not determined how these malfunctioning channels are related to the buildup of lipofuscin in the macula and progressive vision loss.  The PRPH2 gene provides instructions for making a protein called peripherin 2. This protein is essential for the normal function of light-sensing (photoreceptor) cells in the retina. Mutations in the PRPH2 gene cause vision loss by disrupting structures in these cells that contain light-sensing pigments. It is unclear why PRPH2 mutations affect only central vision in people with adult-onset vitelliform macular dystrophy.
Best disease is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person has one parent with the condition.  The inheritance pattern of adult-onset vitelliform macular dystrophy is uncertain. Some studies have suggested that this disorder may be inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. It is difficult to be sure, however, because many affected people have no history of the disorder in their family, and only a small number of affected families have been reported.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of vitelliform macular dystrophy:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Best Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy  - Genetic Testing Registry: Macular dystrophy, vitelliform, adult-onset  - Genetic Testing Registry: Vitelliform dystrophy  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Macula (image)   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care