Majeed syndrome is characterized by recurrent episodes of fever and inflammation in the bones and skin. The two main features of this condition are chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis (CRMO) and congenital dyserythropoietic anemia (CDA). CRMO causes recurrent episodes of pain and joint swelling which can lead to complications such as slow growth and the development of joint deformities called contractures. CDA involves a shortage of red blood cells which can lead to fatigue (tiredness), weakness, pale skin, and shortness of breath. Most people with Majeed syndrome also develop inflammatory disorders of the skin, most often a condition known as Sweet syndrome. Majeed syndrome results from mutations in the LPIN2 gene. This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
 Majeed syndrome is caused by mutations in the LPIN2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called lipin-2. Researchers believe that this protein may play a role in the processing of fats. It may also be involved in controlling inflammation and play a role in cell division. Mutations in the LPIN2 gene alter the structure and function of lipin-2. It is unclear how these genetic changes lead to bone disease, anemia, and inflammation of the skin in people with Majeed syndrome.
How  Majeed syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene. Although carriers typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition, some parents of children with Majeed syndrome have had an inflammatory skin disorder called psoriasis.
 Treatment is based upon the symptoms present. Chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis (CRMO) is treated with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and physical therapy to avoid disuse atrophy of muscles and contractures. If CRMO does not respond to NSAIDs, corticosteroids can be used short term to control CRMO and skin manifestations. Resolution of bone inflammation has been reported in at least two children who were treated with an IL-1 inhibitor. Congenital dyserythropoietic anemia (CDA) may be treated with red blood cell transfusion.
Majeed syndrome appears to be very rare; it has been reported in three families, all from the Middle East.
Majeed syndrome results from mutations in the LPIN2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called lipin-2. Researchers believe that this protein may play a role in the processing of fats (lipid metabolism). However, no lipid abnormalities have been found with Majeed syndrome. Lipin-2 also may be involved in controlling inflammation and in cell division.  Mutations in the LPIN2 gene alter the structure and function of lipin-2. It is unclear how these genetic changes lead to bone disease, anemia, and inflammation of the skin in people with Majeed syndrome.