Chiari malformations (CMs) are structural defects in the cerebellum. The cerebellum is the part of the brain that controls balance. With CM, brain tissue extends into the spinal canal. It can happen when part of the skull is too small, which pushes the brain tissue down. There are several types of CM. One type often happens in children who have neural tube defects. Some types cause no symptoms and don't need treatment. If you have symptoms, they may include       - Neck pain    - Balance problems    - Numbness or other abnormal feelings in the arms or legs    - Dizziness    - Vision problems    - Difficulty swallowing    - Poor hand coordination       Doctors diagnose CM using imaging tests. Medicines may ease some symptoms, such as pain. Surgery is the only treatment available to correct or stop the progression of nerve damage.    NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
Chiari malformations are structural defects in the cerebellum, the part of the brain that controls balance. When the indented bony space at the lower rear of the skull is smaller than normal, the cerebellum and brainstem can be pushed downward. The resulting pressure on the cerebellum can block the flow of cerebrospinal fluid (the liquid that surrounds and protects the brain and spinal cord) and can cause a range of symptoms including dizziness, muscle weakness, numbness, vision problems, headache, and problems with balance and coordination. Treatment may require surgery. Many patients with the more severe types of Chiari malformations who undergo surgery see a reduction in their symptoms and/or prolonged periods of relative stability, however paralysis is generally permanent despite surgery. There are four types of Chiari malformations. The types tend to correspond with the degree of severity, with type 1 being the most common and least severe. Some people with type 1 have no symptoms and do not require treatment. Chiari malformation type 1 Chiari malformation type 2 Chiari malformation type 3 Chiari malformation type 4
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Chiari malformation. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Areflexia of upper limbs - Arnold-Chiari type I malformation - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Babinski sign - Basilar impression - Diplopia - Dysarthria - Dysphagia - Gait ataxia - Headache - Hearing impairment - Hyperacusis - Limb muscle weakness - Lower limb hyperreflexia - Lower limb spasticity - Nystagmus - Paresthesia - Photophobia - Scoliosis - Small flat posterior fossa - Syringomyelia - Tinnitus - Unsteady gait - Urinary incontinence - Vertigo - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Chiari malformation type 3. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Areflexia of upper limbs - Arnold-Chiari type I malformation - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Babinski sign - Basilar impression - Diplopia - Dysarthria - Dysphagia - Gait ataxia - Headache - Hearing impairment - Hyperacusis - Limb muscle weakness - Lower limb hyperreflexia - Lower limb spasticity - Nystagmus - Paresthesia - Photophobia - Scoliosis - Small flat posterior fossa - Syringomyelia - Tinnitus - Unsteady gait - Urinary incontinence - Vertigo - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Chiari malformation type 1 is a structural abnormality of the cerebellum, the part of the brain that controls balance. It involves the extension of the lower part of the cerebellum into the foramen magnum (the large hole at the base of the skull which allows passage of the spinal cord), without involving the brainstem. Normally, only the spinal cord passes through this opening. This malformation is the most common type of Chiari malformation and may not cause any symptoms. Depending on the symptoms present and severity, some individuals may not require treatment while others may require pain medications or surgery.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Chiari malformation type 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Areflexia of upper limbs - Arnold-Chiari type I malformation - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Babinski sign - Basilar impression - Diplopia - Dysarthria - Dysphagia - Gait ataxia - Headache - Hearing impairment - Hyperacusis - Limb muscle weakness - Lower limb hyperreflexia - Lower limb spasticity - Nystagmus - Paresthesia - Photophobia - Scoliosis - Small flat posterior fossa - Syringomyelia - Tinnitus - Unsteady gait - Urinary incontinence - Vertigo - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Primary or congenital Chiari malformations are caused by structural defects in the brain and spinal cord that occur during fetal development. The underlying cause of the structural defects are not completely understood, but may involve genetic mutations or lack of proper vitamins or nutrients in the maternal diet. Less frequently, Chiari malformation type 1 is acquired after birth. Causes of acquired Chiari malformation type 1 involve the excessive draining of spinal fluid from the lumbar or thoracic areas of the spine as a result of injury, exposure to harmful substances, or infection. Click here to view a diagram of the spine.
 Some individuals with Chiari malformation type 1 are asymptomatic and do not require treatment. Individuals who have minimal symptoms, without syringomyelia, can typically be treated conservatively. Mild neck pain and headaches can usually be treated with pain medications, muscle relaxants, and the occasional use of a soft collar. Individuals with more severe symptoms may be in need of surgery. Surgery is the only treatment available to correct functional disturbances or halt the progression of damage to the central nervous system. The goals of surgical treatment are decompression of the point where the skull meets the spine (the cervicomedullary junction) and restoration of normal flow of cerebrospinal fluid in the region of the foramen magnum (the hole in the bottom of the skull where the spinal cord passes to connect to the brain). Prognosis after surgery for the condition is generally good and typically depends on the extent of neurological deficits that were present before the surgery. Most individuals have a reduction of symptoms and/or prolonged periods of relative stability. More than one surgery may be needed to treat the condition.
Chiari malformation type 2 (CM type II) is a type of Chiari malformation in which both the cerebellum and brain stem tissue extend into the foramen magnum (the hole at the skull base for passing of the spinal cord). This form is often accompanied by a type of spina bifida called myelomeningocele, and can also be accompanied by syringomyelia, hydrocephalus, or other abnormalities. Symptoms in infants may include stridor (wheezing sound); difficulty swallowing (dysphagia); feeding difficulties; hypotonia; and weak cry. Symptoms in children and/or adults may include headache; fatigue; loss of vision; tingling extremities; nausea; dysphagia; dizziness; muscle weakness; and ataxia. Adults and adolescents who previously had no symptoms may begin to have symptoms later in life. The exact cause of the condition is not known but it appears to be due to a developmental failure of the brain stem and upper spine. The term Arnold-Chiari malformation is technically specific to type II but may sometimes be used to describe other types of Chiari malformations.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Chiari malformation type 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Agenesis of corpus callosum 33% Arnold-Chiari malformation - Ataxia - Bulbar signs - Cervical myelopathy - Cyanosis - Dysphagia - Feeding difficulties - Heterotopia - Hydrocephalus - Inspiratory stridor - Limb muscle weakness - Multifactorial inheritance - Muscular hypotonia - Nystagmus - Occipital neuralgia - Opisthotonus - Spina bifida - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Chiari malformation type 2 typically occurs sporadically (in individuals with no history of the condition in the family). However, the exact cause of Chiari malformation type 2 is not known. Genes may play a role in predisposing an individual to the condition, but environmental factors (such as lack of proper vitamins or nutrients in the maternal diet during pregnancy) may also contribute to the condition. Because the cause is unclear, it is not currently possible to estimate what the recurrence risk for family members may be. There have been reports in the medical literature of families in which more than one family member was affected with a Chiari malformation. However, a search of the available medical literature yields limited information specific to familial cases of Chiari malformation type 2. One article written by Lindenberg and Walker in 1971 describes the Arnold-Chiari malformation in 2 sisters; both also had hydrocephalus and meningomyelocele.
Medications may ease certain symptoms, such as pain. Surgery is the only treatment available to correct functional disturbances or halt the progression of damage to the central nervous system. More than one surgery may be needed to treat the condition. Some CMs have no noticeable symptoms and do not interfere with the person's activities of daily living.
Many people with Type I CM are asymptomatic and do not know they have the condition. Many individuals with the more severe types of CM and have surgery see a reduction in their symptoms and/or prolonged periods of relative stability, although paralysis is generally permanent.
The NINDS supports research on disorders of the brain and nervous system such as Chiari malformations. The goals of this research are to increase scientific understanding of these disorders and to find ways to prevent, treat, and, ultimately, cure them. Current NINDS-funded research includes studies to better understand the genetic factors responsible for the malformation, and factors that influence the development, progression, and relief of symptoms among people with syringomyelia, including those with Chiari I malformations.