MMPSI is a rare condition. Although its prevalence is unknown, approximately 100 cases have been described in the medical literature.
The genetic cause of MMPSI is not fully known. Mutations in the KCNT1 gene have been found in several individuals with this condition and are the most common known cause of MMPSI. Mutations in other genes are also thought to be involved in the condition.  The KCNT1 gene provides instructions for making a protein that forms potassium channels. Potassium channels, which transport positively charged atoms (ions) of potassium into and out of cells, play a key role in a cell's ability to generate and transmit electrical signals. Channels made with the KCNT1 protein are active in nerve cells (neurons) in the brain, where they transport potassium ions out of cells. This flow of ions is involved in generating currents to activate (excite) neurons and send signals in the brain.  KCNT1 gene mutations alter the KCNT1 protein. Electrical currents generated by potassium channels made with the altered KCNT1 protein are abnormally increased, which allows unregulated excitation of neurons in the brain. Seizures develop when neurons in the brain are abnormally excited. It is unclear why seizure activity can migrate in MMPSI. Repeated seizures in affected individuals contribute to the developmental delay that is characteristic of this condition.
MMPSI is not inherited from a parent and does not run in families. This condition is caused by a new mutation that occurs very early in embryonic development (called a de novo mutation).
These resources address the diagnosis or management of malignant migrating partial seizures of infancy:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy 14  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: EEG   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care