Leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter is a progressive disorder that mainly affects the central nervous system (CNS). This disorder causes deterioration of white matter, which consists of nerve fibers covered by myelin (the substance that protects the nerves). Most affected people begin to have signs and symptoms during childhood, but symptoms may first become apparent anywhere from before birth to adulthood. Symptoms may include difficulty coordinating movements (ataxia); muscle stiffness (spasticity); and optic atrophy. Symptoms may worsen rapidly with episodes of fever, after head trauma, or with other stresses on the body. This disorder may be caused by mutations in any of 5 genes and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. There is no specific treatment, and prognosis seems to correlate with the age of onset, the earliest forms being more severe.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Juvenile onset 33% Macrocephaly 33% Blindness 7.5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cerebral hypomyelination - Cessation of head growth - CNS demyelination - Decreased serum progesterone - Delusions - Developmental regression - Dysarthria - Emotional lability - Lethargy - Leukoencephalopathy - Memory impairment - Muscular hypotonia - Optic atrophy - Personality changes - Premature ovarian failure - Primary gonadal insufficiency - Secondary amenorrhea - Seizures - Spasticity - Unsteady gait - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter is a genetic condition caused by mutations in any of 5 genes - EIF2B1, EIF2B2, EIF2B3, EIF2B4, and EIF2B5. These genes give the body instructions to make the five parts (subunits) of a protein called eIF2B. This protein helps regulate overall production of protein in cells (protein synthesis). Proper regulation of protein synthesis ensures that the correct levels of protein are available for cells to cope with changing conditions and stress. Mutations in any of these 5 genes results in partial loss of eIF2B function, making it more difficult for cells to regulate protein synthesis and deal with changing conditions and stress. Researchers believe that cells in the white matter may be particularly affected by an abnormal response to stress, thus causing the signs and symptoms of this condition. Approximately 90% of affected people have been found to have mutations in one of these 5 genes. Approximately 10% of families who have been diagnosed by MRI and clinical features do not have an identifiable mutation, suggesting that additional genes may also be responsible for the condition.
How  Leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that a person must have a mutation in both copies of the responsible gene to be affected. The parents of an affected person usually each carry one mutated copy of the gene and are referred to as carriers. Carriers typically do not have signs or symptoms of the condition. When two carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) chance to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be a carrier like each of the parents, and a 25% chance to not have the condition and not be a carrier.
 Treatment for leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter is supportive, aiming to alleviate symptoms. Management may include physical therapy and rehabilitation for motor dysfunction (mainly spasticity and ataxia); and anti-seizure medications for seizures. Infections and fevers should be prevented when possible through the use of vaccinations; low-dose maintenance antibiotics during winter months; antibiotics for minor infections; and antipyretics (fever-reducing medications) for fever. For children, wearing a helmet outside can help minimize the effects of head trauma. Contact sports, head trauma, and stressful situations (including high body temperature) should be avoided. More detailed information about the management of leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter is available on the GeneReviews Web site.
Leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter is a progressive disorder that mainly affects the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system). This disorder causes deterioration of the central nervous system's white matter, which consists of nerve fibers covered by myelin. Myelin is the fatty substance that insulates and protects nerves.  In most cases, people with leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter show no signs or symptoms of the disorder at birth. Affected children may have slightly delayed development of motor skills such as crawling or walking. During early childhood, most affected individuals begin to develop motor symptoms, including abnormal muscle stiffness (spasticity) and difficulty with coordinating movements (ataxia). There may also be some deterioration of mental functioning, but this is not usually as pronounced as the motor symptoms. Some affected females may have abnormal development of the ovaries (ovarian dysgenesis). Specific changes in the brain as seen using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are characteristic of leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter, and may be visible before the onset of symptoms.  While childhood onset is the most common form of leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter, some severe forms are apparent at birth. A severe, early-onset form seen among the Cree and Chippewayan populations of Quebec and Manitoba is called Cree leukoencephalopathy. Milder forms may not become evident until adolescence or adulthood, when behavioral or psychiatric problems may be the first signs of the disease. Some females with milder forms of leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter who survive to adolescence exhibit ovarian dysfunction. This variant of the disorder is called ovarioleukodystrophy.  Progression of leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter is generally uneven, with periods of relative stability interrupted by episodes of rapid decline. People with this disorder are particularly vulnerable to stresses such as infection, mild head trauma or other injury, or even extreme fright. These stresses may trigger the first symptoms of the condition or worsen existing symptoms, and can cause affected individuals to become lethargic or comatose.
The prevalence of leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter is unknown. Although it is a rare disorder, it is believed to be one of the most common inherited diseases that affect the white matter.
Mutations in the EIF2B1, EIF2B2, EIF2B3, EIF2B4, and EIF2B5 genes cause leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter.  The EIF2B1, EIF2B2, EIF2B3, EIF2B4 and EIF2B5 genes provide instructions for making the five parts (subunits) of a protein called eIF2B. The eIF2B protein helps regulate overall protein production (synthesis) in the cell by interacting with another protein, eIF2. The eIF2 protein is called an initiation factor because it is involved in starting (initiating) protein synthesis. Proper regulation of protein synthesis is vital for ensuring that the correct levels of protein are available for the cell to cope with changing conditions. For example, cells must synthesize protein much faster if they are multiplying than if they are in a resting state.  Mutations have been identified in all five of the genes from which the eIF2B protein is produced, although most of these mutations (about 65 percent) occur in the EIF2B5 gene. These mutations cause partial loss of eIF2B function in various ways. For example, they may impair the ability of one of the protein subunits to form a complex with the others, or make it more difficult for the protein to attach to the initiation factor.  Partial loss of eIF2B function makes it more difficult for the body's cells to regulate protein synthesis and deal with changing conditions and stress. Researchers believe that cells in the white matter may be particularly affected by an abnormal response to stress, resulting in the signs and symptoms of leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Childhood Ataxia with Central Nervous System Hypomelination/Vanishing White Matter  - Genetic Testing Registry: Leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care