MECP2 duplication syndrome is a genetic condition that occurs almost exclusively in males and is characterized by moderate to severe intellectual disability. Other signs and symptoms include infantile hypotonia; delayed motor milestones (i.e. sitting up, crawling); recurrent infections; poor or absent speech; seizures; and/or spasticity. MECP2 duplication syndrome occurs when there is an extra copy (duplication) of the MECP2 gene in each cell. This is generally caused by a duplication of genetic material located on the long (q) arm of the X chromosome. The condition is inherited in an X-linked manner. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
 MECP2 duplication syndrome occurs when there is an extra copy (duplication) of the MECP2 gene in each cell. This is generally caused by a duplication of genetic material located on the long (q) arm of the X chromosome. The size of the duplication can vary; however, this does not appear to affect the severity of the condition. People with larger duplications have signs and symptoms that are similar to people with smaller duplications. The MECP2 gene encodes a protein that is important for normal brain functioning. Although it plays many roles, one of its most important functions is to regulate other genes in the brain by switching them on and off. A duplication of the MECP2 gene leads to the production of excess protein, which is unable to properly regulate the expression of other genes. This results in irregular brain activity, leading to the signs and symptoms of MECP2 duplication syndrome.
 MECP2 duplication syndrome is inherited in an X-linked manner. A condition is considered X-linked if the genetic change that causes the condition is located on the X chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes (the Y chromosome is the other sex chromosome). In males (who have only one X chromosome), a duplication of the MECP2 gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a duplication of one of the two copies of the gene typically does not cause the disorder. Early in the development of females, one of the two X chromosomes is randomly and permanently inactivated in each cell (called X-inactivation). X-inactivation prevents female cells from having twice as many functional X chromosomes as males. Because X-inactivation is usually random, the X chromosome inherited from the mother is active in some cells, and the X chromosome inherited from the father is active in other cells. However, when a female has an X chromosome with a duplicated copy of the MECP2 gene, the abnormal chromosome is often preferentially inactivated in many or all cells. This is called "skewed X-inactivation." It prevents some women with an MECP2 duplication from developing features of the duplication since the extra genetic material is not active. In most cases, MECP2 duplication syndrome is inherited from a mother who has no signs or symptoms of the duplication. Rarely, the condition is not inherited and occurs due to a random event during the formation of the egg or sperm, or in early fetal development. When this happens, it is called a de novo duplication (occurring as a new genetic change for the first time in the affected person).
 A diagnosis of MECP2 duplication syndrome is often suspected based on the presence of characteristic signs and symptoms. Genetic testing can then be ordered to confirm the diagnosis.
 Because MECP2 duplication syndrome affects many different systems of the body, medical management is often provided by a team of doctors and other healthcare professionals. Treatment for this condition varies based on the signs and symptoms present in each person. For example, infants with trouble swallowing and/or other feeding difficulties may require a feeding tube. Early developmental interventions may be recommended to help affected children reach their potential. This may include physical therapy, speech therapy and/or occupational therapy. Medications may be prescribed to treat seizures or spasticity. Recurrent infections are usually treated aggressively with appropriate antibiotics. Please speak with a healthcare provider if you have any questions about your personal medical management plan or that of a family member.
The prevalence of MECP2 duplication syndrome is unknown; approximately 120 affected individuals have been reported in the scientific literature. It is estimated that this condition is responsible for 1 to 2 percent of all cases of intellectual disability caused by changes in the X chromosome.
MECP2 duplication syndrome is caused by a genetic change in which there is an extra copy of the MECP2 gene in each cell. This extra copy of the MECP2 gene is caused by a duplication of genetic material on the long (q) arm of the X chromosome. The size of the duplication varies from 100,000 to 900,000 DNA building blocks (base pairs), also written as 100 to 900 kilobases (kb). The MECP2 gene is always included in this duplication, and other genes may be involved, depending on the size of the duplicated segment. Extra copies of these other genes do not seem to affect the severity of the condition, because people with larger duplications have signs and symptoms that are similar to people with smaller duplications.  The MECP2 gene provides instructions for making a protein called MeCP2 that is critical for normal brain function. Researchers believe that this protein has several functions, including regulating other genes in the brain by switching them off when they are not needed. An extra copy of the MECP2 gene leads to the production of excess MeCP2 protein, which is unable to properly regulate the expression of other genes. The misregulation of gene expression in the brain results in abnormal nerve cell (neuronal) function. These neuronal abnormalities cause irregular brain activity, leading to the signs and symptoms of MECP2 duplication syndrome.