Guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency is an inherited condition that affects the brain and muscles. Affected people may begin showing symptoms of the condition from early infancy to age three. Signs and symptoms can vary but may include mild to severe intellectual disability, epilepsy, speech development limited to a few words, behavioral problems (i.e. hyperactivity, autistic behaviors, self-mutilation), and involuntary movements. Guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency is caused by changes (mutations) in the GAMT gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment aims to increase the levels of creatine in the brain through supplementation with high doses of oral creatine monohydrate.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Ataxia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Delayed speech and language development - Hyperreflexia - Hypertonia - Infantile muscular hypotonia - Intellectual disability - Myoclonus - Progressive extrapyramidal movement disorder - Seizures - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency is an inherited disorder that primarily affects the brain and muscles. Without early treatment, people with this disorder have neurological problems that are usually severe. These problems include intellectual disability, speech development limited to a few words, and recurrent seizures (epilepsy). Affected individuals may also exhibit autistic behaviors that affect communication and social interaction or self-injurious behaviors such as head-banging. Other features of this disorder can include involuntary movements (extrapyramidal dysfunction) such as tremors or facial tics.  People with guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency may have weak muscle tone and delayed development of motor skills such as sitting or walking. In severe cases they may lose previously acquired skills such as the ability to support their head or to sit unsupported.
Guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency is a very rare disorder. About 80 affected individuals have been described in the medical literature. Of these, approximately one-third are of Portuguese origin.
Mutations in the GAMT gene cause guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency. The GAMT gene provides instructions for making the enzyme guanidinoacetate methyltransferase. This enzyme participates in the two-step production (synthesis) of the compound creatine from the protein building blocks (amino acids) glycine, arginine, and methionine. Specifically, guanidinoacetate methyltransferase controls the second step of this process. In this step, creatine is produced from another compound called guanidinoacetate. Creatine is needed for the body to store and use energy properly.  GAMT gene mutations impair the ability of the guanidinoacetate methyltransferase enzyme to participate in creatine synthesis, resulting in a shortage of creatine. The effects of guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency are most severe in organs and tissues that require large amounts of energy, especially the brain.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Creatine Deficiency Syndromes  - Genetic Testing Registry: Deficiency of guanidinoacetate methyltransferase   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care