About once a month, your dialysis care team will test your blood by using one of two formulasURR or Kt/Vto see whether your treatments are removing enough wastes. Both tests look at one specific waste product, called blood urea nitrogen (BUN), as an indicator for the overall level of waste products in your system. For more information about these measurements, see the NIDDK fact sheet Hemodialysis Dose and Adequacy.
Peritoneal dialysis is a treatment for kidney failure that uses the lining of your abdomen, or belly, to filter your blood inside your body. Doctors call this lining the peritoneum. A doctor will place a soft tube, called a catheter, in your belly a few weeks before you start treatment.
                
When you start peritoneal dialysis, dialysis solutionwater with salt and other additivesflows from a bag through the catheter into your belly. When the bag is empty, you can disconnect your catheter from the bag and cap it so you can move around and do your normal activities. While the dialysis solution is inside your belly, it soaks up wastes and extra fluid from your body. After a few hours, you drain the used dialysis solution into a drain bag. You can then dispose of the used dialysis solution, which is now full of wastes and extra fluid, in a toilet or down the drain of a sink or bathtub. Then you start over with a fresh bag of dialysis solution.
                
The process of first draining the used dialysis solution and then replacing it with fresh solution is called an exchange. Most people do four to six exchanges every day, or during the night using a machine that moves the fluid in and out. The process goes on continuously, so you always have dialysis solution in your belly soaking up wastes and extra fluid from your body. For the best results from peritoneal dialysis, it is important that you perform all of your exchanges as your doctor instructs.
Your health care team will perform several tests to tell if your dialysis exchanges are removing enough wastes. These tests are especially important during the first weeks of treatment to determine whether your schedule is adequate.
                
Peritoneal Equilibration Test
                
For a peritoneal equilibration test, a dialysis nurse takes samples of your blood and dialysis solution during a 4-hour exchange. The peritoneal equilibration test measures how much dextrose your body absorbs from a bag of dialysis solution. The peritoneal equilibration test also measures how much urea and creatininewaste products of normal muscle and protein breakdownmove from your blood into the dialysis solution.
                
Clearance Test
                
For a clearance test, you will collect the used dialysis solution from a 24-hour period. A dialysis nurse takes a blood sample during the same 24-hour period. Your doctor or nurse compares the amount of urea in the used solution with the amount in your blood to see how much urea was removed. For the first months or even years of peritoneal dialysis treatment, you may still produce small amounts of urine. If you produce more than 100 milliliters (3 ounces) of urine per day, you will also collect your urine to measure its urea content.
                
From the measurements of used solution, blood, and, if available, urine, your health care team can determine your urea clearancea measurement doctors call your Kt/Vand your creatinine clearance rate. These measurements will show whether you are using the right peritoneal dialysis schedule and doses. If your dialysis schedule is not removing enough wastes, your doctor will make adjustments. More information is provided in the NIDDK health topic, Peritoneal Dialysis Dose and Adequacy.
- Peritoneal dialysis is a treatment for kidney failure that uses the lining of your abdomen, or belly, to filter your blood inside your body.  - The two types of peritoneal dialysis are continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis and automated peritoneal dialysis.  - The most common problem with peritoneal dialysis is peritonitis, a serious abdominal infection.  - When dialysis solution stays in the body too long, it becomes so full of wastes and extra fluid that it cannot absorb any more from the body. The process may even reverse, letting some wastes and extra fluid back into the body.  - Eating the right foods can help you feel better while on peritoneal dialysis. Talk with your dialysis centers dietitian to find a meal plan that works for you.