The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for 8q12 microduplication syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of chromosome segregation 90% Blepharophimosis 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Highly arched eyebrow 90% Muscular hypotonia 90% Sensorineural hearing impairment 90% Strabismus 90% Ventricular septal defect 90% Abnormality of calvarial morphology 50% Abnormality of the cranial nerves 50% Atria septal defect 50% Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 50% Brachydactyly syndrome 50% Epicanthus 50% Long philtrum 50% Narrow mouth 50% Short toe 50% Telecanthus 50% Vesicoureteral reflux 50% Wide nasal bridge 50% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
15q13.3 microduplication syndrome is a rare chromosome abnormality first described in 2009. Since only a small number of individuals with this microduplication have been reported, the full range of effects is still being discovered. What is known is that the symptoms are variable, even between members of the same family. While some people with this microduplication do not have symptoms, several features seem to be common, including delayed development, intellectual disability, communication difficulties, emotional and behavioral problems (including autistic spectrum disorders), insomnia, and seizures. 15q13.3 microduplication syndrome is caused by a tiny duplication (microduplication) on the long arm of chromosome 15 that spans at least 6 genes. The features of this syndrome are thought to be caused by the presence of three copies of the genes in this region, instead of the normal two. However, it is unclear which genes contribute to the specific features. In addition, it is likely that other genetic or environmental factors influence the symptoms seen in this condition. Some cases of 15q13.3 microduplication syndrome are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner with reduced penetrance. Other cases are new (de novo). Treatment typically focuses on treating the symptoms (such as medication for seizures).
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Microduplication Xp11.22-p11.23 syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of chromosome segregation 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Neurological speech impairment 90% Abnormality of the voice 50% EEG abnormality 50% Obesity 50% Pes cavus 50% Pes planus 50% Precocious puberty 50% Seizures 50% Toe syndactyly 50% Autism 7.5% Absence seizures - Hoarse voice - Intellectual disability, borderline - Nasal speech - Phenotypic variability - Poor speech - Shyness - Syndactyly - X-linked dominant inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.