15q13.3 microdeletion syndrome is a type of contiguous gene deletion syndrome. Individuals with this microdeletion may have very different signs and symptoms from other affected individuals (even within the same family), or no symptoms at all. Features of the condition may include mild to moderate mental retardation, learning difficulties, or normal intelligence; autism; epilepsy (recurring seizures); and mental illness (such as schizophrenia or bipolar disorder). Various dysmorphic (abnormally formed) features have been reported, but there are no consistent physical features among individuals who have the condition. It is caused by a tiny deletion (microdeletion) on the long arm of chromosome 15 that spans at least 6 genes; the features of the syndrome are caused by the absence of these genes, which are usually necessary for normal growth and development. It can be inherited in an autosomal dominant manner with reduced penetrance, or can occur as a new (de novo) deletion. Treatment typically focuses on individual signs and symptoms (such as medication for seizures) when possible.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for 15q13.3 microdeletion syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal facial shape 50% Cognitive impairment 50% Incomplete penetrance 50% Abnormal nasal morphology 7.5% Abnormality of the pinna 7.5% Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 7.5% Autism 7.5% Clinodactyly of the 5th finger 7.5% Epicanthus 7.5% Frontal bossing 7.5% Low-set, posteriorly rotated ears 7.5% Macrocephaly 7.5% Melanocytic nevus 7.5% Microcephaly 7.5% Muscular hypotonia 7.5% Seizures 7.5% Short stature 7.5% Strabismus 7.5% Behavioral abnormality 10/19 Muscular hypotonia 9/18 Abnormality of the palpebral fissures 7/19 Intellectual disability, moderate 6/17 Abnormality of the pinna 6/19 Intellectual disability, mild 5/17 Specific learning disability 7/25 Clinodactyly of the 5th finger 4/19 Intellectual disability, severe 3/18 Abnormality of cardiovascular system morphology 3/19 Brachydactyly syndrome 3/19 Hypertelorism 3/19 Strabismus 3/19 Synophrys 3/19 Seizures 2/18 Autosomal dominant inheritance - Phenotypic variability - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Genetic testing for 15q13.3 microdeletion testing is available. GeneTests lists the names of laboratories that are performing genetic testing for 15q13.3 microdeletion syndrome. To view the contact information for the clinical laboratories conducting testing click here. Please note: Most of the laboratories listed through GeneTests do not accept direct contact from patients and their families; therefore, individuals who are interested in learning more should work with a health care provider or a genetics professional. Click here for a list of online resources for locating a genetics professional near you.
15q13.3 microdeletion is a chromosomal change in which a small piece of chromosome 15 is deleted in each cell. The deletion occurs on the long (q) arm of the chromosome at a position designated q13.3. This chromosomal change increases the risk of intellectual disability, seizures, behavioral problems, and psychiatric disorders. However, some people with a 15q13.3 microdeletion do not appear to have any associated features.  About half of all people with a 15q13.3 microdeletion have learning difficulties or intellectual disability, which is usually mild or moderate. Many of these individuals have delayed speech and language skills. 15q13.3 microdeletion also appears to be a major risk factor for recurrent seizures (epilepsy); about one-third of people with this chromosomal change have epilepsy.  15q13.3 microdeletion has also been associated with behavioral problems, including a short attention span, aggression, impulsive behavior, and hyperactivity. Some people with a 15q13.3 microdeletion have been diagnosed with developmental disorders that affect communication and social interaction (autism spectrum disorders). This chromosomal change may also be associated with an increased risk of psychiatric disorders, particularly schizophrenia. Other signs and symptoms of 15q13.3 microdeletion can include heart defects, minor abnormalities involving the hands and arms, and subtle differences in facial features.  Some people with a 15q13.3 microdeletion do not have any of the intellectual, behavioral, or physical features described above. In these individuals, the microdeletion is often detected when they undergo genetic testing because they have an affected relative. It is unknown why a 15q13.3 microdeletion causes cognitive and behavioral problems in some individuals but few or no health problems in others.
15q13.3 microdeletion likely occurs in about 1 in 40,000 people in the general population. It appears to be more common in people with intellectual disability, epilepsy, schizophrenia, or autism spectrum disorders.
Most people with a 15q13.3 microdeletion are missing a sequence of about 2 million DNA building blocks (base pairs), also written as 2 megabases (Mb), at position q13.3 on chromosome 15. The exact size of the deleted region varies, but it typically contains at least six genes. This deletion usually affects one of the two copies of chromosome 15 in each cell.  The signs and symptoms that can result from a 15q13.3 microdeletion are probably related to the loss of one or more genes in this region. However, it is unclear which missing genes contribute to the specific features of the disorder. Because some people with a 15q13.3 microdeletion have no obvious signs or symptoms, researchers believe that other genetic or environmental factors may also be involved.
15q13.3 microdeletion is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the deleted region on chromosome 15 in each cell is sufficient to increase the risk of intellectual disability and other characteristic features.  In about 75 percent of cases, individuals with 15q13.3 microdeletion inherit the chromosomal change from a parent. In the remaining cases, 15q13.3 microdeletion occurs in people whose parents do not carry the chromosomal change. In these individuals, the deletion occurs most often as a random event during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs and sperm) or in early fetal development.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of 15q13.3 microdeletion:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: 15q13.3 Microdeletion  - Genetic Testing Registry: 15q13.3 microdeletion syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care