Syndromic microphthalmia, type 3 is a rare condition that affects the eyes and other parts of the body. Babies with this condition are generally born without eyeballs (anophthalmia) or with eyes that are unusually small (microphthalmia). Both of these abnormalities can be associated with severe vision loss. Other signs and symptoms of syndromic microphthalmia, type 3 may include seizures, brain malformations, esophageal atresia, delayed motor development, learning disabilities, and sensorineural hearing loss. The condition is caused by changes (mutations) in the SOX2 gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Syndromic microphthalmia, type 3. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Aplasia/Hypoplasia affecting the eye 90% Tracheoesophageal fistula 90% Abnormal form of the vertebral bodies 50% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the corpus callosum 50% Cryptorchidism 50% External ear malformation 50% Visual impairment 50% Abnormality of the ribs 7.5% Cognitive impairment 7.5% Displacement of the external urethral meatus 7.5% Holoprosencephaly 7.5% Hydrocephalus 7.5% Hypoplasia of penis 7.5% Iris coloboma 7.5% Patent ductus arteriosus 7.5% Sclerocornea 7.5% Ventricular septal defect 7.5% Agenesis of corpus callosum - Anophthalmia - Anterior pituitary hypoplasia - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Butterfly vertebrae - Coloboma - Esophageal atresia - Frontal bossing - Hemivertebrae - Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism - Hypoplasia of the corpus callosum - Hypospadias - Hypothalamic hamartoma - Microcephaly - Micropenis - Microphthalmia - Missing ribs - Muscular hypotonia - Optic nerve hypoplasia - Postnatal growth retardation - Rib fusion - Sensorineural hearing impairment - Short stature - Spastic diplegia - Spastic tetraplegia - Specific learning disability - Supernumerary ribs - Vertebral fusion - Vertebral hypoplasia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Microphthalmia mental deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Joint hypermobility 5% Overlapping toe 5% Agenesis of corpus callosum - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cerebellar hypoplasia - Cerebral atrophy - Congenital cataract - Cryptorchidism - Deeply set eye - External genital hypoplasia - Facial hypertrichosis - Failure to thrive - Hyperreflexia - Hypoplasia of the corpus callosum - Intellectual disability - Kyphoscoliosis - Macrotia - Microcephaly - Microcornea - Microphthalmia - Muscular hypotonia - Optic atrophy - Osteoporosis - Ptosis - Short stature - Spastic diplegia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Microphthalmia syndromic 5. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Cleft palate 5% Cryptorchidism 5% Ectopic posterior pituitary 5% Micropenis 5% Short stature 5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Cataract - Coloboma - Joint laxity - Microcornea - Microphthalmia - Muscular hypotonia - Retinal dystrophy - Seizures - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Microphthalmia syndromic 8. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Aplasia/Hypoplasia affecting the eye 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Mandibular prognathia 90% Median cleft lip 90% Microcephaly 90% Split foot 90% Cryptorchidism 50% Triphalangeal thumb 50% Visual impairment 50% Ventricular septal defect 7.5% Blepharophimosis - Cleft palate - Intellectual disability - Microcornea - Microphthalmia - Oral cleft - Premature skin wrinkling - Short palpebral fissure - Widely-spaced maxillary central incisors - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Microphthalmia is an eye abnormality that arises before birth. In this condition, one or both eyeballs are abnormally small. In some affected individuals, the eyeball may appear to be completely missing; however, even in these cases some remaining eye tissue is generally present. Such severe microphthalmia should be distinguished from another condition called anophthalmia, in which no eyeball forms at all. However, the terms anophthalmia and severe microphthalmia are often used interchangeably. Microphthalmia may or may not result in significant vision loss.  People with microphthalmia may also have a condition called coloboma. Colobomas are missing pieces of tissue in structures that form the eye. They may appear as notches or gaps in the colored part of the eye called the iris; the retina, which is the specialized light-sensitive tissue that lines the back of the eye; the blood vessel layer under the retina called the choroid; or in the optic nerves, which carry information from the eyes to the brain. Colobomas may be present in one or both eyes and, depending on their size and location, can affect a person's vision.  People with microphthalmia may also have other eye abnormalities, including clouding of the lens of the eye (cataract) and a narrowed opening of the eye (narrowed palpebral fissure). Additionally, affected individuals may have an abnormality called microcornea, in which the clear front covering of the eye (cornea) is small and abnormally curved.  Between one-third and one-half of affected individuals have microphthalmia as part of a syndrome that affects other organs and tissues in the body. These forms of the condition are described as syndromic. When microphthalmia occurs by itself, it is described as nonsyndromic or isolated.
Microphthalmia occurs in approximately 1 in 10,000 individuals.
Microphthalmia may be caused by changes in many genes involved in the early development of the eye, most of which have not been identified. The condition may also result from a chromosomal abnormality affecting one or more genes. Most genetic changes associated with isolated microphthalmia have been identified only in very small numbers of affected individuals.  Microphthalmia may also be caused by environmental factors that affect early development, such as a shortage of certain vitamins during pregnancy, radiation, infections such as rubella, or exposure to substances that cause birth defects (teratogens).
Isolated microphthalmia is sometimes inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. In some cases, parents of affected individuals have less severe eye abnormalities.  When microphthalmia occurs as a feature of a genetic syndrome or chromosomal abnormality, it may cluster in families according to the inheritance pattern for that condition, which may be autosomal recessive or other patterns.  Often microphthalmia is not inherited, and there is only one affected individual in a family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of microphthalmia:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Microphthalmia/Anophthalmia/Coloboma Spectrum  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cataract, congenital, with microphthalmia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cataract, microphthalmia and nystagmus  - Genetic Testing Registry: Microphthalmia, isolated 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Microphthalmia, isolated 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Microphthalmia, isolated 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Microphthalmia, isolated 4  - Genetic Testing Registry: Microphthalmia, isolated 5  - Genetic Testing Registry: Microphthalmia, isolated 6  - Genetic Testing Registry: Microphthalmia, isolated 7  - Genetic Testing Registry: Microphthalmia, isolated 8  - Genetic Testing Registry: Microphthalmia, isolated, with coloboma 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Microphthalmia, isolated, with coloboma 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Microphthalmia, isolated, with coloboma 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Microphthalmia, isolated, with coloboma 4  - Genetic Testing Registry: Microphthalmia, isolated, with coloboma 5  - Genetic Testing Registry: Microphthalmia, isolated, with coloboma 6  - Genetic Testing Registry: Microphthalmia, isolated, with corectopia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Microphthalmos   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care