Mandibulofacial dysostosis with microcephaly (MFDM) is a disorder characterized by developmental delay and abnormalities of the head and face. Affected people are usually born with a small head that does not grow at the same rate as the body (progressive microcephaly). Developmental delay and intellectual disability can range from mild to severe. Facial abnormalities may include underdevelopment of the midface and cheekbones; a small lower jaw; small and abnormally-shaped ears; and other distinctive facial features. Other features of MFDM may include hearing loss, cleft palate, heart problems, abnormalities of the thumbs, abnormalities of the trachea and/or esophagus, and short stature. MFDM is caused by mutations in the EFTUD2 gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.
 Mandibulofacial dysostosis with microcephaly (MFDM) is caused by mutations in the EFTUD2 gene. This gene gives the body instructions for making part of spliceosomes, which help process a type of RNA- a chemical cousin of DNA that serves as a genetic blueprint for making proteins. Mutations in EFTUD2 impair the production or function of the enzyme from the gene, which impairs the processing of mRNA. However, at this time, it is not clear how this process causes the specific symptoms of MFDM.
How  Mandibulofacial dysostosis with microcephaly (MFDM) is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that having one mutated copy of the responsible gene in each cell of the body is enough to cause signs and symptoms of the condition. When a person with an autosomal dominant condition has children, each child has a 50% (1 in 2) chance to inherit the mutated copy of the gene. Most cases of MFDM are due to new mutations that occur for the first time in the affected person (called de novo mutations), and are not inherited from a parent. In other cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from a parent. The parent may be mildly affected or may be unaffected. Sometimes, an unaffected parent has the mutation only in some or all of their sperm or egg cells (not their body cells), which is known as germline mosaicism.
 Yes. Genetic testing is available for mandibulofacial dysostosis with microcephaly (MFDM) and confirms the diagnosis in virtually all people suspected of having MFDM. There are two approaches to genetic testing for this condition. One is sequence analysis of the EFTUD2 gene to identify a mutation (which detects ~91% of affected people), and the other is deletion analysis (which detects ~9%), for people in whom sequencing does not detect a mutation. When a diagnosis of MFDM is strongly suspected but genetic testing is inconclusive, a clinical diagnosis may still be appropriate. However, given the high sensitivity of genetic testing for this condition, other disorders with overlapping features should first be carefully considered. The Genetic Testing Registry (GTR) provides information about the genetic tests for this condition. The intended audience for the GTR is health care providers and researchers. Patients and consumers with specific questions about a genetic test should contact a health care provider or a genetics professional.
 Individualized treatment of craniofacial features is managed by a multidisciplinary team which may include various specialists. Surgery may be needed for a variety of abnormalities, in the newborn period or beyond. Treatment of hearing loss is individualized, and may involve conventional hearing aids, bone-anchored hearing aid, and/or cochlear implants. Occupational, physical, and/or speech/language therapies are involved as needed to optimize developmental outcome. Additional treatment information is available on GeneReviews' Web site.
Mandibulofacial dysostosis with microcephaly (MFDM) is a disorder that causes abnormalities of the head and face. People with this disorder often have an unusually small head at birth, and the head does not grow at the same rate as the rest of the body, so it appears that the head is getting smaller as the body grows (progressive microcephaly). Affected individuals have developmental delay and intellectual disability that can range from mild to severe. Speech and language problems are also common in this disorder.  Facial abnormalities that occur in MFDM include underdevelopment of the middle of the face and the cheekbones (midface and malar hypoplasia) and an unusually small lower jaw (mandibular hypoplasia, also called micrognathia). The external ears are small and abnormally shaped, and they may have skin growths in front of them called preauricular tags. There may also be abnormalities of the ear canal, the tiny bones in the ears (ossicles), or a part of the inner ear called the semicircular canals. These ear abnormalities lead to hearing loss in most affected individuals. Some people with MFDM have an opening in the roof of the mouth (cleft palate), which may also contribute to hearing loss by increasing the risk of ear infections. Affected individuals can also have a blockage of the nasal passages (choanal atresia) that can cause respiratory problems.  Heart problems, abnormalities of the thumbs, and short stature are other features that can occur in MFDM. Some people with this disorder also have blockage of the esophagus (esophageal atresia). In esophageal atresia, the upper esophagus does not connect to the lower esophagus and stomach. Most babies born with esophageal atresia (EA) also have a tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), in which the esophagus and the trachea are abnormally connected, allowing fluids from the esophagus to get into the airways and interfere with breathing. Esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) is a life-threatening condition; without treatment, it prevents normal feeding and can cause lung damage from repeated exposure to esophageal fluids.
MFDM is a rare disorder; its exact prevalence is unknown. More than 60 affected individuals have been described in the medical literature.
MFDM is caused by mutations in the EFTUD2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making one part (subunit) of two complexes called the major and minor spliceosomes. Spliceosomes help process messenger RNA (mRNA), which is a chemical cousin of DNA that serves as a genetic blueprint for making proteins. The spliceosomes recognize and then remove regions called introns to help produce mature mRNA molecules.  EFTUD2 gene mutations that cause MFDM result in the production of little or no functional enzyme from one copy of the gene in each cell. A shortage of this enzyme likely impairs mRNA processing. The relationship between these mutations and the specific symptoms of MFDM is not well understood.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Most cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. In other cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from a parent. The parent may be mildly affected or may be unaffected. Sometimes the parent has the gene mutation only in some or all of their sperm or egg cells, which is known as germline mosaicism. In these cases, the parent has no signs or symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of MFDM:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Mandibulofacial Dysostosis with Microcephaly  - Genetic Testing Registry: Growth and mental retardation, mandibulofacial dysostosis, microcephaly, and cleft palate   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care