If you suffer from migraine headaches, you're not alone. About 12 percent of the U.S. population gets them. Migraines are recurring attacks of moderate to severe pain. The pain is throbbing or pulsing, and is often on one side of the head. During migraines, people are very sensitive to light and sound. They may also become nauseated and vomit.     Migraine is three times more common in women than in men. Some people can tell when they are about to have a migraine because they see flashing lights or zigzag lines or they temporarily lose their vision.     Many things can trigger a migraine. These include        -  Anxiety    -  Stress    -  Lack of food or sleep     -  Exposure to light    -  Hormonal changes (in women)       Doctors used to believe migraines were linked to the opening and narrowing of blood vessels in the head. Now they believe the cause is related to genes that control the activity of some brain cells. Medicines can help prevent migraine attacks or help relieve symptoms of attacks when they happen. For many people, treatments to relieve stress can also help.    NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
Basilar migraine is a type of migraine headache with aura that is associated with bilateral (on both sides) pain at the back of the head. An aura is a group of symptoms that generally serve as a warning sign that a bad headache is coming and may include dizziness and vertigo, slurred speech, ataxia, tinnitus, visual changes, and loss of balance. Although basilar migraines can occur in men and women of all ages, they are most common in adolescent girls. The exact underlying cause is not well understood. However, migraines are likely complex disorders that are influenced by multiple genes in combination with lifestyle and environmental factors. In rare cases, the susceptibility to basilar migraines may be caused by a change (mutation) in the ATP1A2 gene or CACNA1A gene. During episodes, affected people are typically treated with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and antiemetic medications to help alleviate the symptoms.
 The exact underlying cause of basilar migraines is not well understood. Basilar migraines, like all types of migraines, are likely complex disorders that are influenced by multiple genes in combination with lifestyle and environmental factors. Scientists also suspect that nerve abnormalities and/or altered blood flow to certain parts of the brain (brainstem and occipital lobes, specifically) may also play a role in the development of basilar migraines. The susceptibility to basilar migraines may rarely be caused by a change (mutation) in the ATP1A2 gene or CACNA1A gene. In these cases, episodes of basilar migraines may occur in more than one family member.
 In most cases, basilar migraines are not inherited. However, the susceptibility to basilar migraines may rarely be caused by a change (mutation) in the ATP1A2 gene or CACNA1A gene. In these cases, they are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that to be affected, a person only needs a mutation in one copy of the responsible gene in each cell. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from an affected parent. Other cases may result from new (de novo) mutations in the gene. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. A person with one of these mutations has a 50% chance with each pregnancy of passing along the altered gene to his or her child.
 A diagnosis of basilar migraine is made based on the presence of characteristic signs and symptoms. Although there are no tests available to confirm the diagnosis, additional testing may be ordered to rule out other conditions that can cause similar features. These tests may include: Brain MRI MR angiogram (MRA) Electroencephalogram 24-hour heart monitor Specialized blood tests
 During episodes of basilar migraines, people are generally treated with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and antiemetic medications to help alleviate the symptoms. In some cases, a nerve block can be used to treat pain if other therapies are ineffective. In people with episodes of basilar migraines that are frequent, prolonged, or particularly debilitating, certain medications such as verapamil or topiramate may be prescribed as a preventative therapy.
There is no absolute cure for migraine since its pathophysiology has yet to be fully understood. There are two ways to approach the treatment of migraine headache with drugs: prevent the attacks, or relieve the symptoms during the attacks. Prevention involves the use of medications and behavioral changes. Drugs originally developed for epilepsy, depression, or high blood pressure to prevent future attacks have been shown to be extremely effective in treating migraine. Botulinum toxin A has been shown to be effective in prevention of chronic migraine. Behaviorally, stress management strategies, such as exercise, relaxation techniques, biofeedback mechanisms, and other therapies designed to limit daily discomfort, may reduce the number and severity of migraine attacks. Making a log of personal triggers of migraine can also provide useful information for trigger-avoiding lifestyle changes, including dietary considerations, eating regularly scheduled meals with adequate hydration, stopping certain medications, and establishing a consistent sleep schedule. Hormone therapy may help some women whose migraines seem to be linked to their menstrual cycle. A weight loss program is recommended for obese individuals with migraine.
                
Relief of symptoms, or acute treatments, during attacks consists of sumatriptan, ergotamine drugs, and analgesics such as ibuprofen and aspirin. The sooner these treatments are administered, the more effective they are.
Responsive prevention and treatment of migraine is incredibly important. Evidence shows an increased sensitivity after each successive attack, eventually leading to chronic daily migraine in some individuals With proper combination of drugs for prevention and treatment of migraine attacks most individuals can overcome much of the discomfort from this debilitating disorder. Women whose migraine attacks occur in association with their menstrual cycle are likely to have fewer attacks and milder symptoms after menopause.