Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy (MNGIE) syndrome is a condition that particularly affects the digestive system and nervous system. Signs and symptoms of this condition most often begin by age 20 and worsen with time. Almost all people with MNGIE have gastrointestinal dysmotility, in which the muscles and nerves of the digestive system do not move food through the digestive tract efficiently. Affected individuals also experience peripheral neuropathy, droopy eyelids (ptosis), weakness of the muscles that control eye movement (ophthalmoplegia), and hearing loss. Leukoencephalopathy, which is the deterioration of a type of brain tissue known as white matter, is a hallmark of MNGIE; however it does not usually cause symptoms in people with this disorder. Mutations in the TYMP gene cause MNGIE, and this condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abdominal pain - Areflexia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cachexia - Constipation - Death in early adulthood - Decreased activity of cytochrome C oxidase in muscle tissue - Distal amyotrophy - Distal muscle weakness - Distal sensory impairment - Gastrointestinal dysmotility - Gastroparesis - Hypointensity of cerebral white matter on MRI - Intermittent diarrhea - Lactic acidosis - Leukoencephalopathy - Malabsorption - Malnutrition - Mitochondrial myopathy - Multiple mitochondrial DNA deletions - Progressive - Progressive external ophthalmoplegia - Ptosis - Ragged-red muscle fibers - Sensorineural hearing impairment - Subsarcolemmal accumulations of abnormally shaped mitochondria - Vomiting - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The clinical diagnosis of mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy syndrome (MNGIE) is based on the presence of severe gastrointestinal dysmotility (when the muscles and nerves of the digestive system do not move food through the digestive tract efficiently), cachexia (wasting away of muscle and fat tissue), ptosis, external ophthalmoplegia (weakness in the muscles that control eye movement), sensorimotor neuropathy, asymptomatic leukoencephalopathy (observed on brain MRI), and a family history consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance. Direct evidence of MNGIE syndrome can be provided by one of the following:  A blood test showing an increase in plasma thymidine concentration (greater than 3 mol/L) and an increase in plasma deoxyuridine concentration (greater than 5 mol/L). This is sufficient to make the diagnosis of MNGIE disease. Thymidine phosphorylase enzyme activity in leukocytes (white blood cells) less than 10% of the control mean. Genetic testing of TYMP, the gene for thymidine phosphorylase (the enzyme deficient in individuals with MNGIE syndrome), detects mutations in approximately all of affected individuals.
 References John M Shoffner. Mitochondrial Neurogastrointestinal Encephalopathy Disease. GeneReviews. May 11, 2010; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1179/. Accessed 3/27/2011.
Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy (MNGIE) disease is a condition that affects several parts of the body, particularly the digestive system and nervous system. The major features of MNGIE disease can appear anytime from infancy to adulthood, but signs and symptoms most often begin by age 20. The medical problems associated with this disorder worsen with time.  Abnormalities of the digestive system are among the most common and severe features of MNGIE disease. Almost all affected people have a condition known as gastrointestinal dysmotility, in which the muscles and nerves of the digestive system do not move food through the digestive tract efficiently. The resulting digestive problems include feelings of fullness (satiety) after eating only a small amount, trouble swallowing (dysphagia), nausea and vomiting after eating, episodes of abdominal pain, diarrhea, and intestinal blockage. These gastrointestinal problems lead to extreme weight loss and reduced muscle mass (cachexia).  MNGIE disease is also characterized by abnormalities of the nervous system, although these tend to be milder than the gastrointestinal problems. Affected individuals experience tingling, numbness, and weakness in their limbs (peripheral neuropathy), particularly in the hands and feet. Additional neurological signs and symptoms can include droopy eyelids (ptosis), weakness of the muscles that control eye movement (ophthalmoplegia), and hearing loss. Leukoencephalopathy, which is the deterioration of a type of brain tissue known as white matter, is a hallmark of MNGIE disease. These changes in the brain can be seen with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), though they usually do not cause symptoms in people with this disorder.
The prevalence of MNGIE disease is unknown. About 70 people with this disorder have been reported.
Mutations in the TYMP gene (previously known as ECGF1) cause MNGIE disease. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called thymidine phosphorylase. Thymidine is a molecule known as a nucleoside, which (after a chemical modification) is used as a building block of DNA. Thymidine phosphorylase breaks down thymidine into smaller molecules, which helps regulate the level of nucleosides in cells.  TYMP mutations greatly reduce or eliminate the activity of thymidine phosphorylase. A shortage of this enzyme allows thymidine to build up to very high levels in the body. Researchers believe that an excess of this molecule is damaging to a particular kind of DNA known as mitochondrial DNA or mtDNA. Mitochondria are structures within cells that convert the energy from food into a form that cells can use. Although most DNA is packaged in chromosomes within the nucleus, mitochondria also have a small amount of their own DNA.  Mitochondria use nucleosides, including thymidine, to build new molecules of mtDNA as needed. A loss of thymidine phosphorylase activity and the resulting buildup of thymidine disrupt the usual maintenance and repair of mtDNA. As a result, mutations can accumulate in mtDNA, causing it to become unstable. Additionally, mitochondria may have less mtDNA than usual (mtDNA depletion). These genetic changes impair the normal function of mitochondria. Although mtDNA abnormalities underlie the digestive and neurological problems characteristic of MNGIE disease, it is unclear how defective mitochondria cause the specific features of the disorder.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the TYMP gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of MNGIE disease:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Mitochondrial Neurogastrointestinal Encephalopathy Disease  - Genetic Testing Registry: Myoneural gastrointestinal encephalopathy syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Leukoencephalopathy (image)   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care