Mntriers disease causes the ridges along the inside of the stomach wallcalled rugaeto enlarge, forming giant folds in the stomach lining. The rugae enlarge because of an overgrowth of mucous cells in the stomach wall.
                
In a normal stomach, mucous cells in the rugae release protein-containing mucus. The mucous cells in enlarged rugae release too much mucus, causing proteins to leak from the blood into the stomach. This shortage of protein in the blood is known as hypoproteinemia. Mntriers disease also reduces the number of acid-producing cells in the stomach, which decreases stomach acid.
                
Mntriers disease is also called Mntrier disease or hypoproteinemic hypertrophic gastropathy.
Scientists are unsure about what causes Mntriers disease; however, researchers think that most people acquire, rather than inherit, the disease. In extremely rare cases, siblings have developed Mntriers disease as children, suggesting a genetic link.
                
Studies suggest that people with Mntriers disease have stomachs that make abnormally high amounts of a protein called transforming growth factor-alpha (TGF-).
                
TGF- binds to and activates a receptor called epidermal growth factor receptor. Growth factors are proteins in the body that tell cells what to do, such as grow larger, change shape, or divide to make more cells. Researchers have not yet found a cause for the overproduction of TGF-.
                
Some studies have found cases of people with Mntriers disease who also had Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection. H. pylori is a bacterium that is a cause of peptic ulcers, or sores on the lining of the stomach or the duodenum, the first part of the small intestine. In these cases, treatment for H. pylori reversed and improved the symptoms of Mntriers disease.1
                
Researchers have linked some cases of Mntriers disease in children to infection with cytomegalovirus (CMV). CMV is one of the herpes viruses. This group of viruses includes the herpes simplex viruses, which cause chickenpox, shingles, and infectious mononucleosis, also known as mono. Most healthy children and adults infected with CMV have no symptoms and may not even know they have an infection. However, in people with a weakened immune system, CMV can cause serious disease, such as retinitis, which can lead to blindness.
                
Researchers are not sure how H. pylori and CMV infections contribute to the development of Mntriers disease.
Mntriers disease is rare. The disease is more common in men than in women. The average age at diagnosis is 55.2
The most common symptom of Mntriers disease is pain in the upper middle part of the abdomen. The abdomen is the area between the chest and hips.
                
Other signs and symptoms of Mntriers disease may include
                
- nausea and frequent vomiting  - diarrhea  - loss of appetite  - extreme weight loss  - malnutrition  - low levels of protein in the blood  - swelling of the face, abdomen, limbs, and feet due to low levels of protein in the blood  - anemiatoo few red blood cells in the body, which prevents the body from getting enough oxygendue to bleeding in the stomach
                
People with Mntriers disease have a higher chance of developing stomach cancer, also called gastric cancer.
Treatment may include medications, IV protein, blood transfusions, and surgery.
                
Medications
                
Health care providers may prescribe the anticancer medication cetuximab (Erbitux) to treat Mntriers disease. Studies have shown that cetuximab blocks the activity of epidermal growth factor receptor and can significantly improve a persons symptoms, as well as decrease the thickness of the stomach wall from the overgrowth of mucous cells. A person receives cetuximab by IV in a health care providers office or an outpatient center. Studies to assess the effectiveness of cetuximab to treat Mntriers disease are ongoing. A health care provider also may prescribe medications to relieve nausea and abdominal pain.
                
In people with Mntriers disease who also have H. pylori or CMV infection, treatment of the infection may improve symptoms. Health care providers prescribe antibiotics to kill H. pylori. Antibiotic regimens may differ throughout the world because some strains of H. pylori have become resistant to certain antibioticsmeaning that an antibiotic that once destroyed the bacterium is no longer effective. Health care providers use antiviral medications to treat CMV infection in a person with a weakened immune system in order to prevent a serious disease from developing as a result of CMV. Antiviral medications cannot kill CMV; however, they can slow down the virus reproduction.
                
Intravenous Protein and Blood Transfusions
                
A health care provider may recommend an IV treatment of protein and a blood transfusion to a person who is malnourished or anemic because of Mntriers disease. In most cases of children with Mntriers disease who also have had CMV infection, treatment with protein and a blood transfusion led to a full recovery.
                
Surgery
                
If a person has severe Mntriers disease with significant protein loss, a surgeon may need to remove part or all of the stomach in a surgery called gastrectomy.
                
Surgeons perform gastrectomy in a hospital. The patient will require general anesthesia. Some surgeons perform a gastrectomy through laparoscopic surgery rather than through a wide incision in the abdomen. In laparoscopic surgery, the surgeon uses several smaller incisions and feeds special surgical tools through the incisions to remove the diseased part of the stomach. After gastrectomy, the surgeon may reconstruct the changed portions of the GI tract so that it may continue to function. Usually the surgeon attaches the small intestine to any remaining portion of the stomach or to the esophagus if he or she removed the entire stomach.
Researchers have not found that eating, diet, and nutrition play a role in causing or preventing Mntriers disease. In some cases, a health care provider may prescribe a high-protein diet to offset the loss of protein due to Mntriers disease. Some people with severe malnutrition may require IV nutrition, which is called total parenteral nutrition (TPN). TPN is a method of providing an IV liquid food mixture through a special tube in the chest.