Dry mouth is the feeling that there is not enough saliva in the mouth. Everyone has dry mouth once in a while -- if they are nervous, upset, under stress, or taking certain medications. But if you have dry mouth all or most of the time, see a dentist or physician. Many older adults have dry mouth, but it is not a normal part of aging. (Watch the video to learn more about dry mouth. To enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. To reduce the video, press the Escape (Esc) button on your keyboard.) Why Saliva is Important Saliva does more than keep your mouth wet. It protects teeth from decay, helps heal sores in your mouth, and prevents infection by controlling bacteria, viruses, and fungi in the mouth. Saliva helps digest food and helps us chew and swallow. Saliva is involved in taste perception as well. Each of these functions of saliva is hampered when a person has dry mouth. How Dry Mouth Feels Dry mouth can be uncomfortable. Some people notice a sticky, dry feeling in the mouth. Others notice a burning feeling or difficulty while eating. The throat may feel dry, too, making swallowing difficult and choking common. Also, people with dry mouth may get mouth sores, cracked lips, and a dry, rough tongue.
People get dry mouth when the glands in the mouth that make saliva are not working properly. Because of this, there might not be enough saliva to keep your mouth healthy. There are several reasons why these glands, called salivary glands, might not work right. Medicines and Dry Mouth More than 400 medicines, including some over-the-counter medications, can cause the salivary glands to make less saliva, or to change the composition of the saliva so that it can't perform the functions it should. As an example, medicines for urinary incontinence, allergies, high blood pressure, and depression often cause dry mouth. Diseases That Can Cause Dry Mouth Some diseases can affect the salivary glands. Dry mouth can occur in patients with diabetes. Dry mouth is also the hallmark symptom of the fairly common autoimmune disease Sjgren's syndrome. Sjgren's syndrome can occur either by itself or with another autoimmune disease like rheumatoid arthritis or lupus. Salivary and tear glands are the major targets of the syndrome and the result is a decrease in production of saliva and tears. The disorder can occur at any age, but the average person with the disorder at the Sjgren's Syndrome Clinic of the National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research (NIDCR) is in his or her late 50s. Women with the disorder outnumber men 9 to 1. Cancer Treatments and Dry Mouth Certain cancer treatments can affect the salivary glands. Head and neck radiation therapy can cause the glands to produce little or no saliva. Chemotherapy may cause the salivary glands to produce thicker saliva, which makes the mouth feel dry and sticky. Injury to the head or neck can damage the nerves that tell salivary glands to make saliva.
Dry mouth can be uncomfortable. Some people notice a sticky, dry feeling in the mouth. Others notice a burning feeling or difficulty while eating. The throat may feel dry, too, and swallowing without extra fluids can often be difficult. Also, people with dry mouth may develop mouth sores, cracked lips, and a dry, rough tongue.
Certain cancer treatments can affect the salivary glands. Head and neck radiation therapy can cause the glands to produce little or no saliva. Chemotherapy may cause the salivary glands to produce thicker saliva, which makes the mouth feel dry and sticky.
Your mouth is one of the most important parts of your body. Any problem that affects your mouth can make it hard to eat, drink or even smile.     Some common mouth problems include       - Cold sores - painful sores on the lips and around the mouth, caused by a virus    - Canker sores - painful sores in the mouth, caused by bacteria or viruses    - Thrush - a yeast infection that causes white patches in your mouth     - Leukoplakia - white patches of excess cell growth on the cheeks, gums or tongue, common in smokers    - Dry mouth - a lack of enough saliva, caused by some medicines and certain diseases    - Gum or tooth problems    - Bad breath       Treatment for mouth disorders varies, depending on the problem. Keeping a clean mouth by brushing and flossing often is important.