Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS) is a rare genetic disorder that affects many systems of the body. The main features include moderate to severe intellectual disability, distinctive facial features, and epilepsy. Other features may include Hirschsprung disease; heart (cardiac) defects; kidney (renal) abnormalities; genital abnormalities; eye abnormalities; and short stature. It is caused by a mutation or deletion in the ZEB2 gene, which usually occurs for the first time (sporadically) in affected people. Treatment typically focuses on the specific symptoms in each person.
 Mowat-Wilson syndrome is caused by mutations in the ZEB2 (also known as ZFHX1B or SIP-1) gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that plays a critical role in the formation of many organs and tissues before birth. It is a transcription factor, which means that it attaches (binds) to specific regions of DNA and helps control the activity of particular genes. Researchers believe that ZEB2 protein is involved in the development of tissues that give rise to the nervous system, digestive tract, facial features, heart, and other organs. Mowat-Wilson syndrome almost always results from the loss of one working copy of the ZEB2 gene in each cell. In some cases, the entire gene is deleted. In other cases, mutations within the gene lead to the production of an abnormally short, nonfunctional version of the ZEB2 protein. A shortage of this protein disrupts the normal development of many organs and tissues, which causes the varied signs and symptoms of Mowat-Wilson syndrome.
 Mowat-Wilson syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Most cases of Mowat-Wilson syndrome result from new (de novo) mutations in the gene that occur during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) or in early embryonic development. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
The prevalence of Mowat-Wilson syndrome is unknown. More than 200 people with this condition have been reported in the medical literature.
Mutations in the ZEB2 gene cause Mowat-Wilson syndrome. The ZEB2 gene provides instructions for making a protein that plays a critical role in the formation of many organs and tissues before birth. This protein is a transcription factor, which means that it attaches (binds) to specific regions of DNA and helps control the activity of particular genes. Researchers believe that the ZEB2 protein is involved in the development of tissues that give rise to the nervous system, digestive tract, facial features, heart, and other organs.  Mowat-Wilson syndrome almost always results from a loss of one working copy of the ZEB2 gene in each cell. In some cases, the entire gene is deleted. In other cases, mutations within the gene lead to the production of an abnormally short, nonfunctional version of the ZEB2 protein. A shortage of this protein disrupts the normal development of many organs and tissues, which causes the varied signs and symptoms of Mowat-Wilson syndrome.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Mowat-Wilson syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Mowat-Wilson Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Mowat-Wilson syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hirschsprung's Disease   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care