Moyamoya disease is a rare, progressive, blood vessel disease caused by blocked arteries at the base of the brain in an area called the basal ganglia. The name "moyamoya" means "puff of smoke" in Japanese and describes the look of the tangled vessels that form to compensate for the blockage. This condition usually affects children, but can affect adults. Affected people are at increased risk for blood clots, strokes, and transient ischemic attacks (TIAs) which are frequently accompanied by seizures and muscular weakness, or paralysis on one side of the body. Affected people may also have disturbed consciousness, speech deficits (usually aphasia), sensory and cognitive impairments, involuntary movements, and vision problems. Researchers believe that Moyamoya disease is an inherited condition because it tends to run in families. Moyamoya syndrome is a related term that refers to cases of moyamoya disease that occur in association with other conditions or risk factors, such as neurofibromatosis, tuberculosis meningitis, sickle cell disease, leptospirosis, brain tumors, Sturge-Weber syndrome, and tuberous sclerosis.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Moyamoya disease. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the cerebral vasculature 50% Cognitive impairment 50% Seizures 50% Ventriculomegaly 50% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Inflammatory arteriopathy - Telangiectasia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 In some families, risk for moyamoya disease is inherited. Changes in the RNF213 gene have been associated with the condition. There are other gene changes involved in moyamoya disease, that remain to be found. Factors such as infection or inflammation, likely also play a role in the condition's development in these families. Other people develop moyamoya syndrome or phenomenon. Moyamoya syndrome can occur in association with many different conditions, such as with infections, atherosclerosis (clogged arteries), blood disorders (for example sickle cell disease or beta thalassemia), vasculitis, autoimmune conditions (for example Lupus, thyroid disorders, Sneddon syndrome), connective tissue disorders (for example neurofibromatosis (NF) type 1 or Tuberous sclerosis), chromosome disorders, metabolic diseases, head trauma or radiation, brain tumors, and heart disease, to name a few.
 Treatment for Moyamoya disease should begin early in the disease course to prevent severe complications. Surgery is the mainstay of treatment, and is the only viable long-term treatment. There are several types of revascularization surgeries that can restore blood flow to the brain by opening narrowed blood vessels, or by bypassing blocked arteries. While children usually respond better to revascularization surgery than adults, the majority of individuals have no further strokes or related problems after surgery. No medication can stop the narrowing of the brain's blood vessels, or the development of the thin, fragile vessels that characterize the disease. However, medications are used to treat many of the symptoms of the disease, and are often an important part of the management. Medications may include aspirin (to prevent or reduce the development of small blood clots); calcium channel blockers (which may improve symptoms of headaches and reduce symptoms related to transient ischemic attacks); and anti-seizure medications (when needed for a seizure disorder). In a few cases, anticoagulants may be needed for people with unstable or frequent symptoms. However, they are not used long-term due to the risk of cerebral bleeding. Additional information about the treatment of Moyamoya disease is available on Medscape Reference's Web site. People interested in learning about specific treatment options for themselves or family members should speak with their health care provider.
Moyamoya disease is a rare, progressive cerebrovascular disorder caused by blocked arteries at the base of the brain in an area called the basal ganglia. The name moyamoya means puff of smoke in Japanese and describes the look of the tangle of tiny vessels formed to compensate for the blockage. Moyamoya disease was first described in Japan in the 1960s and it has since been found in individuals in the other countries around the world; its incidence is higher in Asian countries than in Europe or North America. The disease primarily affects children, but it can also occur in adults. In children, the first symptom of Moyamoya disease is often stroke, or recurrent transient ischemic attacks (TIA, commonly referred to as mini-strokes), frequently accompanied by muscular weakness or paralysis affecting one side of the body, or seizures. Adults may also experience these symptoms that arise from blocked arteries, but more often experience a hemorrhagic stroke due to bleeding into the brain from the abnormal brain vessels. Individuals with this disorder may have disturbed consciousness, problems with speaking and understanding speech, sensory and cognitive impairments, involuntary movements, and vision problems.About one in 10 individuals with Moyamoya disease has a close relative who is also affected; in these cases researchers think that Moyamoya disease is the result of inherited genetic abnormalities.Studies that look for the abnormal gene(s) may help reveal the biomechanisms that cause the disorder.
There are several types of surgery that can restore blood flow (revascularization) to the brain by opening narrowed blood vessels or by bypassing blocked arteries. Children usually respond better to revascularization surgery than adults, but the majority of individuals have no further strokes or related problems after surgery.
Without surgery, the majority of individuals with Moyamoya disease will experience mental decline and multiple strokes because of the progressive narrowing of arteries.Without treatment,Moyamoya diseasecan be fatal as the result ofintracerebral hemorrhage (bleeding within the brain).
Moyamoya disease is a disorder of blood vessels in the brain, specifically the internal carotid arteries and the arteries that branch from them. These vessels, which provide oxygen-rich blood to the brain, narrow over time. Narrowing of these vessels reduces blood flow in the brain. In an attempt to compensate, new networks of small, fragile blood vessels form. These networks, visualized by a particular test called an angiogram, resemble puffs of smoke, which is how the condition got its name: "moyamoya" is an expression meaning "something hazy like a puff of smoke" in Japanese.  Moyamoya disease commonly begins either around age 5 or in a person's thirties or forties. A lack of blood supply to the brain leads to several symptoms of the disorder, including temporary stroke-like episodes (transient ischemic attacks), strokes, and seizures. In addition, the fragile blood vessels that grow can develop bulges (aneurysms), or they can break open, leading to bleeding (hemorrhage) in the brain. Affected individuals may develop recurrent headaches, involuntary jerking movements (chorea), or a decline in thinking ability. The symptoms of moyamoya disease often worsen over time if the condition is not treated.  Some people have the blood vessel changes characteristic of moyamoya disease in addition to features of another disorder, such as neurofibromatosis type 1, sickle cell disease, or Graves disease. These individuals are said to have moyamoya syndrome.
Moyamoya disease was first identified in Japan, where it is most prevalent, affecting about 5 in 100,000 individuals. The condition is also relatively common in other Asian populations. It is ten times less common in Europe. In the United States, Asian Americans are four times more commonly affected than whites. For unknown reasons, moyamoya disease occurs twice as often in females as in males.
The genetics of moyamoya disease are not well understood. Research suggests that the condition can be passed through families, and changes in one gene, RNF213, have been associated with the condition. Other genes that have not been identified may be involved in moyamoya disease. It is also likely that other factors (such as infection or inflammation) in combination with genetic factors play a role in the condition's development.  The RNF213 gene provides instructions for making a protein whose function is unknown. However, research suggests that the RNF213 protein is involved in the proper development of blood vessels.  Changes in the RNF213 gene involved in moyamoya disease replace single protein building blocks (amino acids) in the RNF213 protein. The effect of these changes on the function of the RNF213 protein is unknown, and researchers are unsure how the changes contribute to the narrowing of blood vessels or the characteristic blood vessel growth of moyamoya disease. For unknown reasons, people with moyamoya disease have elevated levels of proteins involved in cell and tissue growth, including the growth of blood vessels (angiogenesis). An excess of these proteins could account for the growth of new blood vessels characteristic of moyamoya disease. It is not clear if changes in the RNF213 gene are involved in the overproduction of these proteins.
Up to 15 percent of Japanese people with moyamoya disease have one or more family members with the condition, indicating that the condition can be passed through generations in families; however, the inheritance pattern is unknown. Research suggests that the condition follows an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. However, some people who have a copy of the altered gene never develop the condition, which is a situation known as reduced penetrance.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of moyamoya disease:  - Barrow Neurological Institute: What Medical Therapies Are Used To Treat Moyamoya Disease?  - Boston Children's Hospital: Learn More About Treatment for Moyamoya Disease  - Genetic Testing Registry: Moyamoya disease  - Genetic Testing Registry: Moyamoya disease 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Moyamoya disease 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Moyamoya disease 5  - National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: Moyamoya Disease Information Page   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care