Muckle-Wells syndrome is an autoinflammatory disease, and the intermediate form of cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome (CAPS). Signs and symptoms may include recurrent episodes of fever, skin rash, joint pain, abdominal pain, and pinkeye; progressive sensorineural deafness; and amyloidosis. It is caused by mutations in the NLRP3 gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Treatment includes a medication called Anakinra during acute episodes.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Muckle-Wells syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Arthralgia 90% Arthritis 90% Broad foot 90% Cranial nerve paralysis 90% Hepatomegaly 90% Splenomegaly 90% Abdominal pain 50% Nephropathy 50% Nephrotic syndrome 50% Urticaria 50% Abnormality of temperature regulation 7.5% Abnormality of the genital system 7.5% Abnormality of the nose 7.5% Abnormality of the palate 7.5% Abnormality of the voice 7.5% Anemia 7.5% Camptodactyly of finger 7.5% Glaucoma 7.5% Hernia of the abdominal wall 7.5% Ichthyosis 7.5% Macrocephaly 7.5% Myalgia 7.5% Optic atrophy 7.5% Pes cavus 7.5% Polyneuropathy 7.5% Restrictive lung disease 7.5% Short stature 7.5% Skeletal muscle atrophy 7.5% Vasculitis 7.5% Abnormality of the skin - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Conjunctivitis - Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate - Episodic fever - Hearing impairment - Infantile onset - Leukocytosis - Progressive sensorineural hearing impairment - Recurrent aphthous stomatitis - Renal amyloidosis - Renal insufficiency - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Muckle-Wells syndrome is a rare disorder. It has been reported in many regions of the world, but its prevalence is unknown.
Mutations in the NLRP3 gene (also known as CIAS1) cause Muckle-Wells syndrome. The NLRP3 gene provides instructions for making a protein called cryopyrin.  Cryopyrin belongs to a family of proteins called nucleotide-binding domain and leucine-rich repeat containing (NLR) proteins. These proteins are involved in the immune system, helping to regulate the process of inflammation. Inflammation occurs when the immune system sends signaling molecules and white blood cells to a site of injury or disease to fight microbial invaders and facilitate tissue repair. When this has been accomplished, the body stops (inhibits) the inflammatory response to prevent damage to its own cells and tissues.  Cryopyrin is involved in the assembly of a molecular complex called an inflammasome, which helps trigger the inflammatory process. Researchers believe that NLRP3 gene mutations that cause Muckle-Wells syndrome result in a hyperactive cryopyrin protein and an inappropriate inflammatory response. Impairment of the body's mechanisms for controlling inflammation results in the episodes of fever and damage to the body's cells and tissues seen in Muckle-Wells syndrome.
This condition is usually inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In some cases, the inheritance pattern is unknown.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Muckle-Wells syndrome:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Familial amyloid nephropathy with urticaria AND deafness   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care