Mucopolysaccharidosis I (MPS I) is a condition that affects many parts of the body. It is a progressively debilitating disorder; however, the rate of progression varies among affected individuals. MPS I is caused by mutations in the IDUA gene. These mutations lead to reduced levels or the complete lack of the IDUA enzyme. Without the proper amount of this enzyme, large sugar molecules called glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) accumulate within cells called lysosomes. This causes the lysosomes to increase in size, causing many different organs and tissues of the body to become enlarged. This leads to the medical problems seen in the condition.  MPS I was once divided into three separate syndromes: Hurler syndrome, Hurler-Scheie syndrome, and Scheie syndrome, listed from most to least severe. Because no biochemical differences have been identified and the clinical findings overlap, the condition is now divided into two subtypes, severe MPS I and attenuated MPS I. People with severe MPS I typically have an earlier onset of symptoms, a decline in intellectual function, and a shorter lifespan. Although there is no cure for MPS I, bone marrow transplant and enzyme replacement therapy are treatment options that may help manage the symptoms of this condition.
 Mutations in the IDUA gene cause MPS I. The IDUA gene provides instructions for producing an enzyme that is involved in the breakdown of large sugar molecules called glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). Mutations in the IDUA gene reduce or completely eliminate the function of the IDUA enzyme. The lack of IDUA enzyme activity leads to the accumulation of GAGs within cells, specifically inside the lysosomes. Lysosomes are compartments in the cell that digest and recycle different types of molecules. Conditions that cause molecules to build up inside the lysosomes, including MPS I, are called lysosomal storage disorders. The accumulation of GAGs increases the size of the lysosomes, which is why many tissues and organs are enlarged in this disorder.
 MPS I is inherited from both parents in an autosomal recessive pattern.
 The two main treatments for MPS I are enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) and bone marrow transplant. Both of these treatments work by replacing the missing IDUA enzyme. A drug called laronidase or Aldurazyme is the enzyme replacement therapy for MPS I. Treatment with laronidase can improve problems with breathing, growth, the bones, joints and heart. However, this treatment is not expected to treat problems with mental development because laronidase cannot cross the blood-brain barrier. A bone marrow transplant is another treatment option that provides the person with MPS I with cells that can produce the IDUA enyzme. A bone marrow transplant can stop the progression of neurological problems.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Mucopolysaccharidosis type VII. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the pleura 90% Ascites 90% Coarse facial features 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Lymphedema 90% Malar flattening 90% Opacification of the corneal stroma 90% Recurrent respiratory infections 90% Scoliosis 90% Short stature 90% Umbilical hernia 90% Abnormality of the hip bone 50% Abnormality of the liver 50% Epiphyseal stippling 50% Hydrops fetalis 50% Limitation of joint mobility 50% Muscular hypotonia 50% Splenomegaly 50% Talipes 50% Arteriovenous malformation 7.5% Enlarged thorax 7.5% Short neck 7.5% Abnormality of the heart valves - Acetabular dysplasia - Anterior beaking of lower thoracic vertebrae - Anterior beaking of lumbar vertebrae - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Corneal opacity - Dermatan sulfate excretion in urine - Dysostosis multiplex - Flexion contracture - Hearing impairment - Hepatomegaly - Hirsutism - Hydrocephalus - Hypoplasia of the odontoid process - Inguinal hernia - Intellectual disability - J-shaped sella turcica - Macrocephaly - Narrow greater sacrosciatic notches - Neurodegeneration - Pectus carinatum - Platyspondyly - Postnatal growth retardation - Proximal tapering of metacarpals - Thoracolumbar kyphosis - Urinary glycosaminoglycan excretion - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Mucopolysaccharidosis type IV. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of epiphysis morphology 90% Abnormality of the metaphyses 90% Abnormality of the ribs 90% Delayed skeletal maturation 90% Gait disturbance 90% Genu valgum 90% Hearing impairment 90% Joint hypermobility 90% Mucopolysacchariduria 90% Opacification of the corneal stroma 90% Pectus carinatum 90% Reduced bone mineral density 90% Short neck 90% Short stature 90% Short thorax 90% Abnormality of dental enamel 50% Abnormality of the heart valves 50% Abnormality of the hip bone 50% Anteverted nares 50% Carious teeth 50% Coarse facial features 50% Hernia 50% Hyperlordosis 50% Joint dislocation 50% Kyphosis 50% Platyspondyly 50% Scoliosis 50% Spinal canal stenosis 50% Wide mouth 50% Cognitive impairment 7.5% Macrocephaly 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Mucopolysaccharidosis type VI (MPS VI), also known as Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome, is a progressive condition that causes many tissues and organs to enlarge and become inflamed or scarred. Skeletal abnormalities are also common in this condition. The rate at which symptoms worsen varies among affected individuals.  People with MPS VI generally do not display any features of the condition at birth. They often begin to show signs and symptoms of MPS VI during early childhood. The features of MPS VI include a large head (macrocephaly), a buildup of fluid in the brain (hydrocephalus), distinctive-looking facial features that are described as "coarse," and a large tongue (macroglossia). Affected individuals also frequently develop heart valve abnormalities, an enlarged liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly), and a soft out-pouching around the belly-button (umbilical hernia) or lower abdomen (inguinal hernia). The airway may become narrow in some people with MPS VI, leading to frequent upper respiratory infections and short pauses in breathing during sleep (sleep apnea). The clear covering of the eye (cornea) typically becomes cloudy, which can cause significant vision loss. People with MPS VI may also have recurrent ear infections and hearing loss. Unlike other types of mucopolysaccharidosis, MPS VI does not affect intelligence.  MPS VI causes various skeletal abnormalities, including short stature and joint deformities (contractures) that affect mobility. Individuals with this condition may also have dysostosis multiplex, which refers to multiple skeletal abnormalities seen on x-ray. Carpal tunnel syndrome develops in many children with MPS VI and is characterized by numbness, tingling, and weakness in the hands and fingers. People with MPS VI may develop a narrowing of the spinal canal (spinal stenosis) in the neck, which can compress and damage the spinal cord.  The life expectancy of individuals with MPS VI depends on the severity of symptoms. Without treatment, severely affected individuals may survive only until late childhood or adolescence. Those with milder forms of the disorder usually live into adulthood, although their life expectancy may be reduced. Heart disease and airway obstruction are major causes of death in people with MPS VI.
The exact incidence of MPS VI is unknown, although it is estimated to occur in 1 in 250,000 to 600,000 newborns.
Mutations in the ARSB gene cause MPS VI. The ARSB gene provides instructions for producing an enzyme called arylsulfatase B, which is involved in the breakdown of large sugar molecules called glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). GAGs were originally called mucopolysaccharides, which is where this condition gets its name. Mutations in the ARSB gene reduce or completely eliminate the function of arylsulfatase B. The lack of arylsulfatase B activity leads to the accumulation of GAGs within cells, specifically inside the lysosomes. Lysosomes are compartments in the cell that digest and recycle different types of molecules. Conditions such as MPS VI that cause molecules to build up inside the lysosomes are called lysosomal storage disorders. The accumulation of GAGs within lysosomes increases the size of the cells, which is why many tissues and organs are enlarged in this disorder. Researchers believe that the buildup of GAGs may also interfere with the functions of other proteins inside lysosomes, triggering inflammation and cell death.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of mucopolysaccharidosis type VI:  - Emory University Lysosomal Storage Disease Center  - Genetic Testing Registry: Mucopolysaccharidosis type VI  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Mucopolysaccharides  - National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: Mucopolysaccharidoses Fact Sheet  - National MPS Society: Treatments   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Mucopolysaccharidosis type IV (MPS IV), also known as Morquio syndrome, is a progressive condition that mainly affects the skeleton. The rate at which symptoms worsen varies among affected individuals.  The first signs and symptoms of MPS IV usually become apparent during early childhood. Affected individuals develop various skeletal abnormalities, including short stature, knock knees, and abnormalities of the ribs, chest, spine, hips, and wrists. People with MPS IV often have joints that are loose and very flexible (hypermobile), but they may also have restricted movement in certain joints. A characteristic feature of this condition is underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of a peg-like bone in the neck called the odontoid process. The odontoid process helps stabilize the spinal bones in the neck (cervical vertebrae). Odontoid hypoplasia can lead to misalignment of the cervical vertebrae, which may compress and damage the spinal cord, resulting in paralysis or death.  In people with MPS IV, the clear covering of the eye (cornea) typically becomes cloudy, which can cause vision loss. Some affected individuals have recurrent ear infections and hearing loss. The airway may become narrow in some people with MPS IV, leading to frequent upper respiratory infections and short pauses in breathing during sleep (sleep apnea). Other common features of this condition include mildly "coarse" facial features, thin tooth enamel, multiple cavities, heart valve abnormalities, a mildly enlarged liver (hepatomegaly), and a soft out-pouching around the belly-button (umbilical hernia) or lower abdomen (inguinal hernia). Unlike some other types of mucopolysaccharidosis, MPS IV does not affect intelligence.  The life expectancy of individuals with MPS IV depends on the severity of symptoms. Severely affected individuals may survive only until late childhood or adolescence. Those with milder forms of the disorder usually live into adulthood, although their life expectancy may be reduced. Spinal cord compression and airway obstruction are major causes of death in people with MPS IV.
The exact prevalence of MPS IV is unknown, although it is estimated to occur in 1 in 200,000 to 300,000 individuals.
Mutations in the GALNS and GLB1 genes cause MPS IV. These genes provide instructions for producing enzymes involved in the breakdown of large sugar molecules called glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). GAGs were originally called mucopolysaccharides, which is where this condition gets its name. When MPS IV is caused by mutations in the GALNS gene it is called MPS IV type A (MPS IVA), and when it is caused by mutations in the GLB1 gene it is called MPS IV type B (MPS IVB). In general, the two types of MPS IV cannot be distinguished by their signs and symptoms.  Mutations in the GALNS and GLB1 genes reduce or completely eliminate the activity of the enzymes produced from these genes. Without these enzymes, GAGs accumulate within cells, specifically inside the lysosomes. Lysosomes are compartments in the cell that break down and recycle different types of molecules. Conditions such as MPS IV that cause molecules to build up inside the lysosomes are called lysosomal storage disorders. In MPS IV, GAGs accumulate to toxic levels in many tissues and organs, particularly in the bones. The accumulation of GAGs causes the bone deformities in this disorder. Researchers believe that the buildup of GAGs may also cause the features of MPS IV by interfering with the functions of other proteins inside lysosomes and disrupting the movement of molecules inside the cell.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of mucopolysaccharidosis type IV:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Morquio syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Mucopolysaccharidosis, MPS-IV-A  - Genetic Testing Registry: Mucopolysaccharidosis, MPS-IV-B  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Morquio syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Severe MPS I occurs in approximately 1 in 100,000 newborns. Attenuated MPS I is less common and occurs in about 1 in 500,000 newborns.
Mutations in the IDUA gene cause MPS I. The IDUA gene provides instructions for producing an enzyme that is involved in the breakdown of large sugar molecules called glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). GAGs were originally called mucopolysaccharides, which is where this condition gets its name. Mutations in the IDUA gene reduce or completely eliminate the function of the IDUA enzyme. The lack of IDUA enzyme activity leads to the accumulation of GAGs within cells, specifically inside the lysosomes. Lysosomes are compartments in the cell that digest and recycle different types of molecules. Conditions that cause molecules to build up inside the lysosomes, including MPS I, are called lysosomal storage disorders. The accumulation of GAGs increases the size of the lysosomes, which is why many tissues and organs are enlarged in this disorder. Researchers believe that the GAGs may also interfere with the functions of other proteins inside the lysosomes and disrupt the movement of molecules inside the cell.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of mucopolysaccharidosis type I:  - Baby's First Test  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Mucopolysaccharidosis Type I  - Genetic Testing Registry: Mucopolysaccharidosis type I  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hurler Syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Mucopolysaccharides  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Scheie Syndrome  - National MPS Society: Treatments   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Mucopolysaccharidosis type VII (MPS VII), also known as Sly syndrome, is a progressive condition that affects most tissues and organs. The severity of MPS VII varies widely among affected individuals.  The most severe cases of MPS VII are characterized by hydrops fetalis, a condition in which excess fluid builds up in the body before birth. Most babies with hydrops fetalis are stillborn or die soon after birth. Other people with MPS VII typically begin to show signs and symptoms of the condition during early childhood. The features of MPS VII include a large head (macrocephaly), a buildup of fluid in the brain (hydrocephalus), distinctive-looking facial features that are described as "coarse," and a large tongue (macroglossia). Affected individuals also frequently develop an enlarged liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly), heart valve abnormalities, and a soft out-pouching around the belly-button (umbilical hernia) or lower abdomen (inguinal hernia). The airway may become narrow in some people with MPS VII, leading to frequent upper respiratory infections and short pauses in breathing during sleep (sleep apnea). The clear covering of the eye (cornea) becomes cloudy, which can cause significant vision loss. People with MPS VII may also have recurrent ear infections and hearing loss. Affected individuals may have developmental delay and progressive intellectual disability, although intelligence is unaffected in some people with this condition.  MPS VII causes various skeletal abnormalities that become more pronounced with age, including short stature and joint deformities (contractures) that affect mobility. Individuals with this condition may also have dysostosis multiplex, which refers to multiple skeletal abnormalities seen on x-ray. Carpal tunnel syndrome develops in many children with MPS VII and is characterized by numbness, tingling, and weakness in the hands and fingers. People with MPS VII may develop a narrowing of the spinal canal (spinal stenosis) in the neck, which can compress and damage the spinal cord.  The life expectancy of individuals with MPS VII depends on the severity of symptoms. Some affected individuals do not survive infancy, while others may live into adolescence or adulthood. Heart disease and airway obstruction are major causes of death in people with MPS VII.
The exact incidence of MPS VII is unknown, although it is estimated to occur in 1 in 250,000 newborns. It is one of the rarest types of mucopolysaccharidosis.
Mutations in the GUSB gene cause MPS VII. This gene provides instructions for producing the beta-glucuronidase (-glucuronidase) enzyme, which is involved in the breakdown of large sugar molecules called glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). GAGs were originally called mucopolysaccharides, which is where this condition gets its name. Mutations in the GUSB gene reduce or completely eliminate the function of -glucuronidase. The shortage (deficiency) of -glucuronidase leads to the accumulation of GAGs within cells, specifically inside the lysosomes. Lysosomes are compartments in the cell that digest and recycle different types of molecules. Conditions such as MPS VII that cause molecules to build up inside the lysosomes are called lysosomal storage disorders. The accumulation of GAGs increases the size of the lysosomes, which is why many tissues and organs are enlarged in this disorder. Researchers believe that the GAGs may also interfere with the functions of other proteins inside the lysosomes and disrupt many normal functions of cells.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of mucopolysaccharidosis type VII:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Mucopolysaccharidosis type VII  - National MPS Society: A Guide to Understanding MPS VII   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
MPS II occurs in approximately 1 in 100,000 to 1 in 170,000 males.
Mutations in the IDS gene cause MPS II. The IDS gene provides instructions for producing the I2S enzyme, which is involved in the breakdown of large sugar molecules called glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). GAGs were originally called mucopolysaccharides, which is where this condition gets its name. Mutations in the IDS gene reduce or completely eliminate the function of the I2S enzyme. Lack of I2S enzyme activity leads to the accumulation of GAGs within cells, specifically inside the lysosomes. Lysosomes are compartments in the cell that digest and recycle different types of molecules. Conditions that cause molecules to build up inside the lysosomes, including MPS II, are called lysosomal storage disorders. The accumulation of GAGs increases the size of the lysosomes, which is why many tissues and organs are enlarged in this disorder. Researchers believe that the GAGs may also interfere with the functions of other proteins inside the lysosomes and disrupt the movement of molecules inside the cell.
This condition is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. The gene associated with this condition is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of mucopolysaccharidosis type II:  - Baby's First Test  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Mucopolysaccharidosis Type II  - Genetic Testing Registry: Mucopolysaccharidosis, MPS-II  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hunter syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Mucopolysaccharides   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Mucopolysaccharidosis type III (MPS III), also known as Sanfilippo syndrome, is a progressive disorder that mainly affects the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system).  People with MPS III generally do not display any features of the condition at birth, but they begin to show signs and symptoms of the disorder during early childhood. Affected children often initially have delayed speech and behavior problems. They may become restless, destructive, anxious, or aggressive. Sleep disturbances are also very common in children with MPS III. This condition causes progressive intellectual disability and the loss of previously acquired skills (developmental regression). In later stages of the disorder, people with MPS III may develop seizures and movement disorders.  The physical features of MPS III are less pronounced than those of other types of mucopolysaccharidosis. Individuals with MPS III typically have mildly "coarse" facial features, a large head (macrocephaly), a slightly enlarged liver (mild hepatomegaly), and a soft out-pouching around the belly-button (umbilical hernia) or lower abdomen (inguinal hernia). Some people with MPS III have short stature, joint stiffness, or mild dysostosis multiplex, which refers to multiple skeletal abnormalities seen on x-ray. Affected individuals often develop chronic diarrhea and recurrent upper respiratory and ear infections. People with MPS III may also experience hearing loss and vision problems.  MPS III is divided into types IIIA, IIIB, IIIC, and IIID, which are distinguished by their genetic cause. The different types of MPS III have similar signs and symptoms, although the features of MPS IIIA typically appear earlier in life and progress more rapidly. People with MPS III usually live into adolescence or early adulthood.
MPS III is the most common type of mucopolysaccharidosis; the estimated incidence of all four types combined is 1 in 70,000 newborns. MPS IIIA and MPS IIIB are much more common than MPS IIIC and MPS IIID.
Mutations in the GNS, HGSNAT, NAGLU, and SGSH genes cause MPS III. These genes provide instructions for making enzymes involved in the breakdown of large sugar molecules called glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). GAGs were originally called mucopolysaccharides, which is where this condition gets its name. The GNS, HGSNAT, NAGLU, and SGSH enzymes are involved in the step-wise breakdown of a subset of GAGs called heparan sulfate.  MPS IIIA is caused by mutations in the SGSH gene, and MPS IIIB is caused by NAGLU gene mutations. Mutations in the HGSNAT gene result in MPS IIIC, and GNS gene mutations cause MPS IIID. Mutations in these genes reduce or eliminate enzyme function. A lack of any one of these enzymes disrupts the breakdown of heparan sulfate. As a result, partially broken down heparan sulfate accumulates within cells, specifically inside the lysosomes. Lysosomes are compartments in the cell that digest and recycle different types of molecules. Conditions such as MPS III that cause molecules to build up inside the lysosomes are called lysosomal storage disorders. Researchers believe that the accumulation of GAGs interferes with the functions of other proteins inside the lysosomes and disrupts the normal functions of cells. It is unknown why the buildup of heparan sulfate mostly affects the central nervous system in MPS III.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of mucopolysaccharidosis type III:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Mucopolysaccharidosis, MPS-III-A  - Genetic Testing Registry: Mucopolysaccharidosis, MPS-III-B  - Genetic Testing Registry: Mucopolysaccharidosis, MPS-III-C  - Genetic Testing Registry: Mucopolysaccharidosis, MPS-III-D  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Sanfilippo Syndrome  - National MPS Society: A Guide to Understanding MPS III   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care