Muir-Torre syndrome (MTS) is a form of Lynch syndrome and is characterized by sebaceous (oil gland) skin tumors in association with internal cancers. The most common internal site involved is the gastrointestinal tract (with almost half of affected people having colorectal cancer), followed by the genitourinary tract. Skin lesions may develop before or after the diagnosis of the internal cancer. MTS is caused by changes (mutations) in the MLH1 or MSH2 genes and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. A mutation in either of these genes gives a person an increased lifetime risk of developing the skin changes and types of cancer associated with the condition.
 Muir-Torre syndrome is a subtype of Lynch syndrome and may be caused by changes (mutations) in either the MLH1, MSH2, or MSH6 gene. These genes give the body instructions to make proteins needed for repairing DNA. The proteins help fix mistakes that are made when DNA is copied before cells divide. When one of these genes is mutated and causes the related protein to be absent or nonfunctional, the number of DNA mistakes that do not get repaired increases substantially. The affected cells do not function normally, increasing the risk of tumor formation. The MSH2 gene is responsible for MTS in the majority of cases. Mutations in MLH1 and MSH2 have the most severe effect. Not everyone diagnosed with MTS will have a detectable mutation in one of these genes. Other, unidentified genes may also play a role in the development of the condition.
How  Muir-Torre-syndrome (MTS) is a variant of Lynch syndrome and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that having only one changed (mutated) copy of the responsible gene in each cell is enough for a person to develop the condition. When a person with an autosomal dominant condition has children, each child has 50% (1 in 2) chance to inherit the mutated copy of the responsible gene. It is important to note that people who inherit a mutated gene that causes MTS inherit an increased risk of cancer, not the disease itself. Not all people who inherit a mutation in an associated gene will develop cancer. This phenomenon is called reduced penetrance. The majority of people diagnosed with a form of Lynch syndrome have inherited the mutated gene from a parent. However, because not all people with a mutation develop cancer, and the variable age at which cancer may develop, not all people with a mutation have a parent who had cancer. Thus, the family history may appear negative. A positive family history of MTS is identified in roughly 50% of affected people. The percentage of people with Lynch syndrome who have a new mutation in the gene that occurred for the first time (and was not inherited from a parent) is unknown but is estimated to be extremely low.
 A person is suspected to have Muir-Torre syndrome (MTS)if he/she has one or more of the following: History of one or more sebaceous tumors Age younger than 60 years at first presentation of sebaceous tumors Personal history of Lynch-related cancers Family history of Lynch-related cancers The presence of specific skin tumors in MTS may lead to the correct diagnosis even in the absence of a clear family history. A person diagnosed with MTS can also have genetic testing to see if they have a mutation in one of the genes known to cause MTS. However, not everyone with Muir-Torre syndrome will have a detectable mutation in one of these genes. Other, unidentified genes may also play a role in the development of the condition.