The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Steatocystoma multiplex with natal teeth. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Neoplasm of the skin 90% Hypermelanotic macule 50% Nephrolithiasis 50% Recurrent cutaneous abscess formation 50% Congenital, generalized hypertrichosis 7.5% Abnormality of the nail - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Natal tooth - Steatocystoma multiplex - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Steatocystoma multiplex is a condition characterized by numerous skin cysts that tend to develop during puberty. Cysts most often develop on the chest, upper arms and face, but may develop all over the body in some cases. The cysts may become inflamed and cause scarring when they heal. The condition is thought to be caused by mutations in the KRT17 gene and appears to be inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Some researchers have suggested that the condition may be a mild variant of pachyonychia congenita type 2. Treatment may include minor surgery to remove cysts and oral antibiotics or oral isotretinoin to reduce inflammation.
 Signs and symptoms of steatocystoma multiplex include multiple cysts on the skin. The cysts are often 1 to 2 centimeter wide. They frequently occur on the trunk of the body, upper arms, legs, and face; however, they can develop on other parts of the body as well.The cysts are typically filled with a yellowish to white, oily fluid, and occasionally have hair within them. The cysts can become infected and may cause pain and scarring. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Steatocystoma multiplex. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Adenoma sebaceum 90% Nephrolithiasis 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Steatocystoma multiplex - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Mutations in a gene called keratin 17 (KRT17) have been identified in some individuals with inherited steatocystoma multiplex. In these families the condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. In other cases the condition occurs sporadically. This may mean that it is due to a gene mutation that was not inherited, but occurred for the first time in the affected individual. A sporadic condition may also be non-genetic and occur by chance, in which case it is not likely to recur in a family.  In many sporadic cases of steatocystoma multiplex, mutations in the KRT17 gene have not been identified. Cases of steatocystoma multiplex have also been reported in association with pachyonychia congenita, acrokeratosis verruciformis, hypertrophic lichen planus, hypohidrosis, hidradenitis suppurativa, and natal teeth.
 Treatment options for steatocystoma multiplex are limited and have had varying degrees of success. The most effective treatment method is thought to be removal of cysts by surgery.  However, cosmetic concerns, time, cost, and pain need to be considered because affected individuals often have multiple cysts.  In many cases, small incisions (cuts into the skin) allow the cyst and its contents to be removed through the opening.  Other treatment options include medications such as oral isotretinoin to temporarily shrink the cysts and reduce inflammation or oral antibiotics to reduce redness and swelling.  Other procedures may include draining cysts through a procedure called aspiration, liquid nitrogen cryotherapy, dermabrasion, and carbon dioxide laser therapy. In a recently published case study, the authors present a case in which an individual with steatocystomas on the abdomen and lower chest showed substantial clearance of cysts after two laser treatment sessions. Future studies with a larger patient population will be helpful to evaluate this noninvasive treatment option and determine ideal treatment settings, number of treatments, and interval between treatments. This may prove to be an option for individuals with numerous cysts, in whom removal and drainage is not a realistic choice and other treatments have failed to improve the condition.
Steatocystoma multiplex is a skin disorder characterized by the development of multiple noncancerous (benign) cysts known as steatocystomas. These growths begin in the skin's sebaceous glands, which normally produce an oily substance called sebum that lubricates the skin and hair. Steatocystomas are filled with sebum.  In affected individuals, steatocystomas typically first appear during adolescence and are found most often on the torso, neck, upper arms, and upper legs. In most people with steatocystoma multiplex, these cysts are the only sign of the condition. However, some affected individuals also have mild abnormalities involving the teeth or the fingernails and toenails.
Although the prevalence of steatocystoma multiplex is unknown, it appears to be rare.
Steatocystoma multiplex can be caused by mutations in the KRT17 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called keratin 17, which is produced in the nails, the hair follicles, and the skin on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet. It is also found in the skin's sebaceous glands. Keratin 17 partners with a similar protein called keratin 6b to form networks that provide strength and resilience to the skin, nails, and other tissues.  The KRT17 gene mutations that cause steatocystoma multiplex alter the structure of keratin 17, preventing it from forming strong, stable networks within cells. The defective keratin network disrupts the growth and function of cells in the skin and nails, including cells that make up the sebaceous glands. These abnormalities lead to the growth of sebum-containing cysts in people with steatocystoma multiplex. However, it is unclear why steatocystomas are typically the only feature of this disorder.  Many researchers believe that steatocystoma multiplex is a variant form of a disorder called pachyonychia congenita, which can also result from mutations in the KRT17 gene. Like steatocystoma multiplex, pachyonychia congenita involves the growth of steatocystomas. Pachyonychia congenita is also associated with more severe skin and nail abnormalities not usually found in people with steatocystoma multiplex.  In some cases, people with steatocystoma multiplex do not have an identified mutation in the KRT17 gene. The cause of the condition in these individuals is unknown.
When steatocystoma multiplex is caused by mutations in the KRT17 gene, it is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. Autosomal dominant inheritance means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person inherits the condition from an affected parent.  In people with steatocystoma multiplex who do not have identified KRT17 gene mutations, there is usually no family history of the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of steatocystoma multiplex:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Steatocystoma multiplex   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care