Hereditary multiple osteochondromas (HMO) (formerly called hereditary multiple exostoses) is a genetic condition in which people develop multiple benign (noncancerous) bone tumors that are covered by cartilage (called osteochondromas). The number and location of osteochondromas varies greatly among affected individuals. These tumors are not present at birth, but almost all affected people develop multiple osteochondromas by the time they are 12 years old. Once the bones stop growing, the development of new osteochondromas also usually stops. Osteochondromas can cause abnormal growth of the arms, hands, and legs, which can lead to uneven limb lengths (limb length discrepancy) and short stature. These tumors may cause pain, limit joint movement, and exert pressure on nerves, blood vessels, and surrounding tissues. Osteochondromas are typically benign; however, researchers estimate that people with HMO have about a 1% lifetime risk of these tumors becoming a cancerous osteochondrosarcoma. HMO is caused by mutations in the EXT1 and EXT2 genes and is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hereditary multiple osteochondromas. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the humerus 90% Abnormality of the tibia 90% Abnormality of the femur 50% Abnormality of the metaphyses 50% Abnormality of the teeth 50% Abnormality of the ulna 50% Anteverted nares 50% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the radius 50% Aseptic necrosis 50% Bone pain 50% Chondrocalcinosis 50% Cranial nerve paralysis 50% Exostoses 50% Genu valgum 50% Madelung deformity 50% Micromelia 50% Muscle weakness 50% Short stature 50% Abnormal pyramidal signs 7.5% Abnormality of pelvic girdle bone morphology 7.5% Abnormality of the pericardium 7.5% Aneurysm 7.5% Elbow dislocation 7.5% Hemiplegia/hemiparesis 7.5% Osteoarthritis 7.5% Osteolysis 7.5% Recurrent fractures 7.5% Scoliosis 7.5% Synostosis of joints 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
is caused by mutations in the EXT1 and EXT2 genes. It is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means that one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause this condition. In most cases, an affected individual inherits the mutation from one affected parent. Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the condition in their family. Most affected individuals (96%) that have inherited a gene mutation from their parent show signs and symptoms of this condition. However, the family history may appear negative because of the failure to recognize the disorder in family members and/or reduced penetrance. Reports have suggested that some females may not show clinical features of HMO but still have the gene mutation that causes this condition.
 Currently, there is no known medical treatment for HMO. Osteochondromas are not usually removed because they stop growing around age 12. Another consideration is how close the tumor is to the affected bone's growth plate, because surgery can affect how the bone grows. Surgery may be considered, however, if an osteochondroma is causing pain, bone fracture, nerve irritation, or if the tumor continues to grow after the person's bones have stopped growing. The surgical treatment of choice is complete removal of the tumor. Depending on the location of the osteochondroma, this may be relatively simple. However, if an osteochondroma is close to nerves and blood vessels, this may make surgery difficult and risky. Surgery may also be necessary to correct painful limb abnormalities that are caused by multiple osteochondromas. Surgery may be needed to cut and realign the bones that have become deformed, which is known as osteotomy. If the legs are not equal in length, treatment may include a procedure to slow down the growth of the longer leg. Surgery may also be needed to correct the forearm deformity seen in this condition. Adults with this condition who have untreated forearm deformities usually do not have significant functional limitations. Although rare, an osteochondroma can become cancerous (malignant), which usually takes the form of a low grade chondrosarcoma. This type of malignant tumor is unlikely to spread elsewhere in the body. Higher grades of cancer can occur, but this is even more uncommon. In that case, other therapies, such as chemotherapy and radiation, may be used in treatment. GeneReviews provides more information about treatment for hereditary multiple osteochondromas. How might a malignant transformation in hereditary multiple exostoses (HME) be treated? Chondrosarcomas in a person with HME tend to be well differentiated and low grade tumors. The tumors usually grow slowly and do not readily metastasize. Surgical removal is the recommended treatment as the condrosarcomas do not respond to radiation or chemotherapy. The prognosis or long term outlook after surgical removal of the chondrosarcoma for a person with HME is good as long as the tumor has not metastasized.
Hereditary multiple osteochondromas is a condition in which people develop multiple benign (noncancerous) bone tumors called osteochondromas. The number of osteochondromas and the bones on which they are located vary greatly among affected individuals. The osteochondromas are not present at birth, but approximately 96 percent of affected people develop multiple osteochondromas by the time they are 12 years old. Osteochondromas typically form at the end of long bones and on flat bones such as the hip and shoulder blade. Once people with hereditary multiple osteochondromas reach adult height and their bones stop growing, the development of new osteochondromas also usually stops.  Multiple osteochondromas can disrupt bone growth and can cause growth disturbances of the arms, hands, and legs, leading to short stature. Often these problems with bone growth do not affect the right and left limb equally, resulting in uneven limb lengths (limb length discrepancy). Bowing of the forearm or ankle and abnormal development of the hip joints (hip dysplasia) caused by osteochondromas can lead to difficulty walking and general discomfort. Multiple osteochondromas may also result in pain, limited range of joint movement, and pressure on nerves, blood vessels, the spinal cord, and tissues surrounding the osteochondromas.  Osteochondromas are typically benign; however, in some instances these tumors become malignant (cancerous). Researchers estimate that people with hereditary multiple osteochondromas have a 1 in 20 to 1 in 200 lifetime risk of developing cancerous osteochondromas (called sarcomas).
The incidence of hereditary multiple osteochondromas is estimated to be 1 in 50,000 individuals. This condition occurs more frequently in some isolated populations: the incidence is approximately 1 in 1,000 in the Chamorro population of Guam and 1 in 77 in the Ojibway Indian population of Manitoba, Canada.
Mutations in the EXT1 and EXT2 genes cause hereditary multiple osteochondromas. The EXT1 gene and the EXT2 gene provide instructions for producing the proteins exostosin-1 and exostosin-2, respectively. The two exostosin proteins bind together and form a complex found in a cell structure called the Golgi apparatus, which modifies newly produced enzymes and other proteins. In the Golgi apparatus, the exostosin-1 and exostosin-2 complex modifies a protein called heparan sulfate so it can be used by the cell.  When there is a mutation in exostosin-1 or exostosin-2, heparan sulfate cannot be processed correctly and is nonfunctional. Although heparan sulfate is involved in many bodily processes, it is unclear how the lack of this protein contributes to the development of osteochondromas.  If the condition is caused by a mutation in the EXT1 gene it is called hereditary multiple osteochondromas type 1. A mutation in the EXT2 gene causes hereditary multiple osteochondromas type 2. While both type 1 and type 2 involve multiple osteochondromas, mutations in the EXT1 gene likely account for 55 to 75 percent of all cases of hereditary multiple osteochondromas, and the severity of symptoms associated with osteochondromas seems to be greater in type 1.  Researchers estimate that about 15 percent of people with hereditary multiple osteochondromas have no mutation in either the EXT1 or the EXT2 gene. It is not known why multiple osteochondromas form in these individuals.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of hereditary multiple osteochondromas:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Hereditary Multiple Osteochondromas  - Genetic Testing Registry: Multiple congenital exostosis  - Genetic Testing Registry: Multiple exostoses type 2   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care