Multiple system atrophy (MSA) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by symptoms of autonomic nervous system failure such as fainting spells and bladder control problems, combined with motor control symptoms such as tremor, rigidity, and loss of muscle coordination.  MSA affects both men and women primarily in their 50s.  The disease tends to advance rapidly over the course of 9 to 10 years, with progressive loss of motor skills, eventual confinement to bed, and death. The cause of multiple system atrophy is unknown, although environmental toxins, trauma, and genetic factors have been suggested. Most cases are sporadic, meaning they occur at random. A possible risk factor for the disease is variations in the synuclein gene SCNA, which provides instructions for the production of alpha-synuclein. A characteristic feature of MSA is the accumulation of the protein alpha-synuclein in glia, the cells that support nerve cells in the brain. These deposits of alpha-synuclein particularly occur in oligodendroglia, a type of cell that makes myelin (a coating on nerve cells that lets them conduct electrical signals rapidly). This protein also accumulates in Parkinsons disease, but in nerve cells. Because they both have a buildup of alpha-synuclein in cells, MSA and Parkinsons disease are sometimes referred to as synucleinopathies.  There is no cure for this condition, and there is no known way to prevent the disease from getting worse. The goal of treatment is to control symptoms.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Multiple system atrophy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Cognitive impairment 5% Adult onset - Anhidrosis - Ataxia - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Babinski sign - Bradykinesia - Dysarthria - Dysautonomia - Gaze-evoked nystagmus - Hyperreflexia - Hypohidrosis - Impotence - Iris atrophy - Neurodegeneration - Olivopontocerebellar atrophy - Orthostatic hypotension - Parkinsonism - Phenotypic variability - Postural instability - Progressive - Ptosis - Rigidity - Skeletal muscle atrophy - Sporadic - Tremor - Urinary incontinence - Urinary urgency - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Multiple system atrophy (MSA) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by symptoms of autonomic nervous system failure such as fainting spells and bladder control problems, combined with motor control symptoms such as tremor, rigidity, and loss of muscle coordination. MSA affects both men and women primarily in their 50s. Although what causes MSA is unknown, the disorder's symptoms reflect the loss of nerve cells in several different areas in the brain and spinal cord that control the autonomic nervous system and coordinate muscle movements. The loss of nerve cells may be due to the buildup of a protein called alpha-synuclein in the cells that support nerve cells in the brain.
There is no cure for MSA. Currently, there are no treatments to delay the progress of neurodegeneration in the brain. But there are treatments available to help people cope with some of the more disabling symptoms of MSA. In some individuals, levodopa may improve motor function, but the benefit may not continue as the disease progresses.
The disease tends to advance rapidly over the course of 5 to 10 years, with progressive loss of motor skills, eventual confinement to bed, and death. There is no remission from the disease. There is currently no cure.
The NINDS supports research about MSA through grants to major medical institutions across the country. Researchers hope to learn why alpha-synuclein buildup occurs in MSA and Parkinsons disease, and how to prevent it. Drugs that reduce the abnormal alpha-synuclein buildup may be promising treatments for MSA
Multiple system atrophy is a progressive brain disorder that affects movement and balance and disrupts the function of the autonomic nervous system. The autonomic nervous system controls body functions that are mostly involuntary, such as regulation of blood pressure.  Researchers have described two major types of multiple system atrophy, which are distinguished by their major signs and symptoms at the time of diagnosis. In one type, known as MSA-P, a group of movement abnormalities called parkinsonism are predominant. These abnormalities include unusually slow movement (bradykinesia), muscle rigidity, tremors, and an inability to hold the body upright and balanced (postural instability). The other type of multiple system atrophy, known as MSA-C, is characterized by cerebellar ataxia, which causes problems with coordination and balance. This form of the condition can also include speech difficulties (dysarthria) and problems controlling eye movement.  Both forms of multiple system atrophy are associated with abnormalities of the autonomic nervous system. The most frequent autonomic symptoms associated with multiple system atrophy are a sudden drop in blood pressure upon standing (orthostatic hypotension), urinary difficulties, and erectile dysfunction in men.  Multiple system atrophy usually occurs in older adults; on average, signs and symptoms appear around age 55. The signs and symptoms of the condition worsen with time, and affected individuals survive an average of 9 years after their diagnosis.
Multiple system atrophy has a prevalence of about 2 to 5 per 100,000 people.
Multiple system atrophy is a complex condition that is likely caused by the interaction of multiple genetic and environmental factors. Some of these factors have been identified, but many remain unknown.  Changes in several genes have been studied as possible risk factors for multiple system atrophy. The only confirmed genetic risk factors are variants in the SNCA gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called alpha-synuclein, which is abundant in normal brain cells but whose function is unknown. Studies suggest that several common variations in the SNCA gene are associated with an increased risk of multiple system atrophy in people of European descent. However, it is unclear how having one of these SNCA gene variants increases the risk of developing this condition.  Researchers have also examined environmental factors that could contribute to the risk of multiple system atrophy. Initial studies suggested that exposure to solvents, certain types of plastic or metal, and other potential toxins might be associated with the condition. However, these associations have not been confirmed.  Multiple system atrophy is characterized by clumps of abnormal alpha-synuclein protein that build up in cells in many parts of the brain and spinal cord. Over time, these clumps (which are known as inclusions) damage cells in parts of the nervous system that control movement, balance and coordination, and autonomic functioning. The progressive loss of cells in these regions underlies the major features of multiple system atrophy.
Most cases of multiple system atrophy are sporadic, which means they occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Rarely, the condition has been reported to run in families; however, it does not have a clear pattern of inheritance.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of multiple system atrophy:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Shy-Drager syndrome  - Vanderbilt Autonomic Dysfunction Center   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care