Multiminicore disease is thought to be a rare disorder, although its incidence is unknown.
Mutations in the RYR1 and SEPN1 genes cause multiminicore disease.  The severe, classic form of multiminicore disease is usually caused by mutations in the SEPN1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called selenoprotein N. Although its function is unknown, researchers suspect that this protein may play a role in the formation of muscle tissue before birth. It may also be important for normal muscle function after birth. It is unclear, however, how mutations in the SEPN1 gene lead to muscle weakness and the other features of multiminicore disease.  Atypical forms of multiminicore disease often result from mutations in the RYR1 gene. RYR1 mutations are also associated with an increased risk of malignant hyperthermia. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called ryanodine receptor 1, which plays an essential role in skeletal muscles. For the body to move normally, these muscles must tense (contract) and relax in a coordinated way. Muscle contractions are triggered by the flow of charged atoms (ions) into muscle cells. In response to certain signals, the ryanodine receptor 1 protein forms a channel that releases stored calcium ions within muscle cells. The resulting increase in calcium ion concentration inside muscle cells stimulates muscle fibers to contract.  Mutations in the RYR1 gene change the structure and function of the ryanodine receptor 1 protein. Some mutations may lead to problems with regulation of the RYR1 channel, while other mutations appear to change the shape of the channel in such a way that calcium ions cannot flow through properly. A disruption in calcium ion transport prevents muscles from contracting normally, leading to the muscle weakness characteristic of multiminicore disease.  In some affected families, the genetic cause of the disorder has not been found. Mutations in genes other than SEPN1 and RYR1 may underlie the condition in these families.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of multiminicore disease:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Multiminicore Disease  - Genetic Testing Registry: Minicore myopathy with external ophthalmoplegia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Minicore myopathy, antenatal onset, with arthrogryposis  - Genetic Testing Registry: Multiminicore Disease  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Malignant Hyperthermia   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care