Multiple pterygium syndrome, Escobar type is characterized by webbing of the neck, elbows, and/or knees, and joint contractures. Symptoms of Escobar syndrome are present from birth. It can be caused by mutations in the CHRNG gene. It tends to be inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion.
 Some cases of multiple pterygium syndrome, Escobar type are caused by mutations in the CHRNG gene. There are likely other causes of this syndrome as well which have not yet been identified. As a result, in some cases the cause for the syndrome can not be determined.  Escobar syndrome is usually inherited in an autosomal-recessive fashion.
 Multiple pterygium syndrome, Escobar type is diagnosed based on signs and symptoms in the patient. This syndrome should be considered in patients with webs across different body joints, particularly if additional signs and symptoms are present (e.g., subtle facial feature differences). Because skeletal birth defects (especially spine defects), are relatively common in Escobar syndrome radiographs of the complete skeleton may be helpful in diagnosis. Genetic testing for multiple pterygium syndrome, Escobar type is available on a limited basis. This testing can be done using linkage analysis or by sequencing the coding region for the gene.
 There is currently no cure for multiple pterygium syndrome, Escobar type. As a result treatment is aimed at managing the associated symptoms. Orthopedics should be involved for issues arising from scoliosis. Infections should be treated promptly. Contracture releases have been performed with variable outcome. Physical therapy is important to help minimize contractures. When ptosis (droopy eyelids) is present, the patient should be referred to ophthalmology. Patients should also be referred to audiology due to the risk of conductive hearing loss.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Multiple pterygium syndrome X-linked. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal cervical curvature - Abnormal facial shape - Amyoplasia - Cleft palate - Cleft upper lip - Cystic hygroma - Depressed nasal ridge - Edema - Epicanthus - Fetal akinesia sequence - Flexion contracture - Hypertelorism - Hypoplastic heart - Increased susceptibility to fractures - Intrauterine growth retardation - Joint dislocation - Low-set ears - Malignant hyperthermia - Multiple pterygia - Polyhydramnios - Pulmonary hypoplasia - Short finger - Thin ribs - Vertebral fusion - X-linked inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Multiple pterygium syndrome lethal type is a very rare genetic condition affecting the skin, muscles and skeleton. It is characterized by minor facial abnormalities, prenatal growth deficiency, spine defects, joint contractures, and webbing (pterygia) of the neck, elbows, back of the knees, armpits, and fingers.  Fetuses with this condition are usually not born. Some of the prenatal complications include cystic hygroma, hydrops, diaphragmatic hernia, polyhydramnios, underdevelopment of the heart and lungs, microcephaly, bone fusions, joint dislocations, spinal fusion, and bone fractures. Both X-linked and autosomal recessive inheritance have been proposed. Mutations in the CHRNG, CHRNA1, and CHRND genes have been found to cause this condition.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Multiple pterygium syndrome lethal type. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the nose 90% Amniotic constriction ring 90% Camptodactyly of finger 90% Cystic hygroma 90% Epicanthus 90% Hydrops fetalis 90% Intrauterine growth retardation 90% Limitation of joint mobility 90% Polyhydramnios 90% Popliteal pterygium 90% Upslanted palpebral fissure 90% Webbed neck 90% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the lungs 50% Cleft palate 50% Hypertelorism 50% Long philtrum 50% Low-set, posteriorly rotated ears 50% Narrow mouth 50% Short thorax 50% Abnormal dermatoglyphics 7.5% Abnormality of the upper urinary tract 7.5% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the cerebellum 7.5% Congenital diaphragmatic hernia 7.5% Cryptorchidism 7.5% Intestinal malrotation 7.5% Malignant hyperthermia 7.5% Microcephaly 7.5% Skeletal muscle atrophy 7.5% Synostosis of joints 7.5% Abnormal cervical curvature - Abnormal facial shape - Akinesia - Amyoplasia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Depressed nasal ridge - Edema - Fetal akinesia sequence - Flexion contracture - Hypoplastic heart - Increased susceptibility to fractures - Joint dislocation - Low-set ears - Multiple pterygia - Pulmonary hypoplasia - Short finger - Thin ribs - Vertebral fusion - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Multiple pterygium syndrome is a condition that is evident before birth with webbing of the skin (pterygium) at the joints and a lack of muscle movement (akinesia) before birth. Akinesia frequently results in muscle weakness and joint deformities called contractures that restrict the movement of joints (arthrogryposis). As a result, multiple pterygium syndrome can lead to further problems with movement such as arms and legs that cannot fully extend.  The two forms of multiple pterygium syndrome are differentiated by the severity of their symptoms. Multiple pterygium syndrome, Escobar type (sometimes referred to as Escobar syndrome) is the milder of the two types. Lethal multiple pterygium syndrome is fatal before birth or very soon after birth.  In people with multiple pterygium syndrome, Escobar type, the webbing typically affects the skin of the neck, fingers, forearms, inner thighs, and backs of the knee. People with this type may also have arthrogryposis. A side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis) is sometimes seen. Affected individuals may also have respiratory distress at birth due to underdeveloped lungs (lung hypoplasia). People with multiple pterygium syndrome, Escobar type usually have distinctive facial features including droopy eyelids (ptosis), outside corners of the eyes that point downward (downslanting palpebral fissures), skin folds covering the inner corner of the eyes (epicanthal folds), a small jaw, and low-set ears. Males with this condition can have undescended testes (cryptorchidism). This condition does not worsen after birth, and affected individuals typically do not have muscle weakness later in life.  Lethal multiple pterygium syndrome has many of the same signs and symptoms as the Escobar type. In addition, affected fetuses may develop a buildup of excess fluid in the body (hydrops fetalis) or a fluid-filled sac typically found on the back of the neck (cystic hygroma). Individuals with this type have severe arthrogryposis. Lethal multiple pterygium syndrome is associated with abnormalities such as underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the heart, lung, or brain; twisting of the intestines (intestinal malrotation); kidney abnormalities; an opening in the roof of the mouth (a cleft palate); and an unusually small head size (microcephaly). Affected individuals may also develop a hole in the muscle that separates the abdomen from the chest cavity (the diaphragm), a condition called a congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Lethal multiple pterygium syndrome is typically fatal in the second or third trimester of pregnancy.
The prevalence of multiple pterygium syndrome is unknown.
Mutations in the CHRNG gene cause most cases of multiple pterygium syndrome, Escobar type and a smaller percentage of cases of lethal multiple pterygium syndrome. The CHRNG gene provides instructions for making the gamma () protein component (subunit) of the acetylcholine receptor (AChR) protein. The AChR protein is found in the membrane of skeletal muscle cells and is critical for signaling between nerve and muscle cells. Signaling between these cells is necessary for movement. The AChR protein consists of five subunits. The  subunit is found only in the fetal AChR protein. At about the thirty-third week of pregnancy, the  subunit is replaced by another subunit to form adult AChR protein. The replacement of fetal AChR by adult AChR is the reason most people with multiple pterygium syndrome, Escobar type do not have problems with muscle movement after birth.  CHRNG gene mutations result in an impaired or missing  subunit. The severity of the CHRNG gene mutation influences the severity of the condition. Typically, mutations that prevent the production of any  subunit will result in the lethal type, while mutations that allow the production of some  subunit will lead to the Escobar type. Without a functional  subunit, the fetal AChR protein cannot be assembled or properly placed in the muscle cell membrane. As a result, the fetal AChR protein cannot function and the communication between nerve cells and muscle cells in the developing fetus is impaired. A lack of signaling between nerve and muscle cells leads to akinesia and pterygium before birth, and may result in many of the other signs and symptoms of multiple pterygium syndrome.  Mutations in other genes, most providing instructions for other AChR protein subunits, have been found to cause multiple pterygium syndrome. Changes in these genes can cause both the lethal and Escobar types of this condition, although they account for only a small number of cases. Some people with multiple pterygium syndrome do not have an identified mutation in any of the known genes associated with this condition. The cause of the disease in these individuals is unknown.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of multiple pterygium syndrome:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Lethal multiple pterygium syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Multiple pterygium syndrome Escobar type   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care