Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a nervous system disease that affects your brain and spinal cord. It damages the myelin sheath, the material that surrounds and protects your nerve cells. This damage slows down or blocks messages between your brain and your body, leading to the symptoms of MS. They can include       - Visual disturbances    - Muscle weakness    - Trouble with coordination and balance    - Sensations such as numbness, prickling, or "pins and needles"     - Thinking and memory problems       No one knows what causes MS. It may be an autoimmune disease, which happens when your immune system attacks healthy cells in your body by mistake. Multiple sclerosis affects women more than men. It often begins between the ages of 20 and 40. Usually, the disease is mild, but some people lose the ability to write, speak, or walk.    There is no single test for MS. Doctors use a medical history, physical exam, neurological exam, MRI, and other tests to diagnose it. There is no cure for MS, but medicines may slow it down and help control symptoms. Physical and occupational therapy may also help.    NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a degenerative disorder that affects the central nervous system, specifically the brain and the spinal cord. The disorder is characterized by destruction of the myelin, the fatty tissue that surrounds and protects the nerve fibers and promotes the transmission of nerve impulses, and damage to nerve cells. The symptoms vary widely from person to person, and may include sensory disturbances in the limbs, problems with muscle control, tremors, muscle stiffness (spasticity), exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia), weakness, difficulty walking, poor bladder control, and vision problems. Most patients have periods during which they have symptoms (clinical attacks). The clinical attacks are typically followed by periods without any symptoms (remission). After several years, the symptoms worsen continuously. Multiple sclerosis is considered an autoimmune disorder but the exact cause is unknown. Risk factors for developing multiple sclerosis include genetic factors like changes in the HLA-DRB1 gene and in the IL7R gene and environmental factors, such as exposure to the Epstein-Barr virus, low levels of vitamin D, and smoking. The goal of treatment of MS is to decrease attacks and the inflammation within the central nervous system.
 Studies suggest that there are many factors that influence whether a person will develop multiple sclerosis (MS). The factors that contribute to its onset are multiple and may vary from person to person. The signs and symptoms of MS occur as a result of inflammation, loss of the protective nerve covering (myelin), and the breakdown of nerve cells. The most widely accepted theory is that MS begins as an autoimmune disorder, where white blood cells (lymphocytes) attack healthy tissues. Later, signs and symptoms occur as a result of abnormal activity of specific cells in the brain and spinal cord (microglial cells) and progressive injury and loss of brain and spinal cord cells. Additional theories regarding the cause of MS include chronic viral infections and genetic disease. Although many viruses, and particularly the Epstein-Barr virus, have been associated with MS, there is no specific evidence linking viruses directly to the development of MS. Still, Epstein-Barr virus infection is considered a risk factor for the disease. Certain gene changes, including ones in HLA-DRB1 are associated with an increased risk for developing multiple sclerosis. However, it is unclear exactly what role these gene changes play in the development of MS. Having a first-degree relative with MS, like a parent or sibling, does increase a persons risk for the condition (to around 2%). Learn more about gene changes and MS. Vitamin D is another area of interest. Those who are exposed to more sunlight tend to have higher levels of naturally-produced vitamin D, which is thought to support the immune function and may help protect against immune-mediated diseases like MS. Further information on the cause of MS is available at the National Multiple Sclerosis Society Web site.
 Symptoms of multiple sclerosis (MS) may be similar to those of many other nervous system disorders. The disease is made based on the person's signs and symptoms and is typically diagnosed by ruling out other conditions. "Dissemination in time and space" are commonly-used criteria for diagnosing the relapsing-remitting form of MS (RR-MS). "Dissemination in time means" that there are at least two clinical attacks, each lasting at least 24 hours, separated by at least one month, or a slow, step-wise progressive course for at least six months. "Dissemination in space" means that there are lesions in more than one area of the brain or spinal cord. For primary progressive MS (PP-MS), there are currently no diagnostic criteria that are universally accepted. Physicians may do many tests to evaluate an individual suspected of having MS. Neurological Exam: May show reduced nerve function in one area of the body or over many parts of the body. This may include abnormal nerve reflexes, decreased ability to move a part of the body, decreased or abnormal sensation, and other loss of nervous system functions. Eye Exam: May show abnormal pupil responses, changes in the visual fields or eye movements, decreased visual acuity, problems with the inside parts of the eye, and rapid eye movements triggered when the eye moves. Other Tests: Lumbar puncture (spinal tap) for cerebrospinal fluid tests, MRI scan of the brain, MRI scan of the spine; nerve function study; and several of blood tests. The Revised McDonald Criteria, published In 2010 by the International Panel on the Diagnosis of Multiple Sclerosis, include specific guidelines for using MRI, visual evoked potentials (VEP) and cerebrospinal fluid analysis to speed the diagnostic process.
A physician may diagnose MS in some patients soon after the onset of the illness. In others, however, doctors may not be able to readily identify the cause of the symptoms, leading to years of uncertainty and multiple diagnoses punctuated by baffling symptoms that mysteriously wax and wane. The vast majority of patients are mildly affected, but in the worst cases, MS can render a person unable to write, speak, or walk. MS is a disease with a natural tendency to remit spontaneously, for which there is no universally effective treatment.
An estimated 1.1 to 2.5 million people worldwide have multiple sclerosis. Although the reason is unclear, this condition is more common in regions that are farther away from the equator. In Canada, parts of the northern United States, western and northern Europe, Russia, and southeastern Australia, the condition affects approximately 1 in 2,000 to 2,400 people. It is less common closer to the equator, such as in Asia, sub-Saharan Africa, and parts of South America, where about 1 in 20,000 people are affected. For unknown reasons, most forms of multiple sclerosis affect women twice as often as men; however, women and men are equally affected by primary progressive MS.
Although the cause of multiple sclerosis is unknown, variations in dozens of genes are thought to be involved in multiple sclerosis risk. Changes in the HLA-DRB1 gene are the strongest genetic risk factors for developing multiple sclerosis. Other factors associated with an increased risk of developing multiple sclerosis include changes in the IL7R gene and environmental factors, such as exposure to the Epstein-Barr virus, low levels of vitamin D, and smoking.  The HLA-DRB1 gene belongs to a family of genes called the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) complex. The HLA complex helps the immune system distinguish the body's own proteins from proteins made by foreign invaders (such as viruses and bacteria). Each HLA gene has many different normal variations, allowing each person's immune system to react to a wide range of foreign proteins. Variations in several HLA genes have been associated with increased multiple sclerosis risk, but one particular variant of the HLA-DRB1 gene, called HLA-DRB1*15:01, is the most strongly linked genetic factor.  The IL7R gene provides instructions for making one piece of two different receptor proteins: the interleukin 7 (IL-7) receptor and the thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) receptor. Both receptors are embedded in the cell membrane of immune cells. These receptors stimulate signaling pathways that induce the growth and division (proliferation) and survival of immune cells. The genetic variation involved in multiple sclerosis leads to production of an IL-7 receptor that is not embedded in the cell membrane but is instead found inside the cell. It is unknown if this variation affects the TSLP receptor.  Because the HLA-DRB1 and IL-7R genes are involved in the immune system, changes in either might be related to the autoimmune response that damages the myelin sheath and nerve cells and leads to the signs and symptoms of multiple sclerosis. However, it is unclear exactly what role variations in either gene plays in development of the condition.
The inheritance pattern of multiple sclerosis is unknown, although the condition does appear to be passed down through generations in families. The risk of developing multiple sclerosis is higher for siblings or children of a person with the condition than for the general population.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of multiple sclerosis:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Multiple Sclerosis Overview  - Multiple Sclerosis Association of America: Treatments for MS  - Multiple Sclerosis International Federation: About MS--Diagnosis  - National Multiple Sclerosis Society: Diagnosing Tools   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care