A heart murmur is an extra or unusual sound heard during a heartbeat. Murmurs range from very faint to very loud. Sometimes they sound like a whooshing or swishing noise.
                
Normal heartbeats make a "lub-DUPP" or "lub-DUB" sound. This is the sound of the heart valves closing as blood moves through the heart. Doctors can hear these sounds and heart murmurs using a stethoscope.
                
Overview
                
The two types of heart murmurs are innocent (harmless) and abnormal.
                
Innocent heart murmurs aren't caused by heart problems. These murmurs are common in healthy children. Many children will have heart murmurs heard by their doctors at some point in their lives.
                
People who have abnormal heart murmurs may have signs or symptoms of heart problems. Most abnormal murmurs in children are caused by congenital (kon-JEN-ih-tal) heart defects. These defects are problems with the heart's structure that are present at birth.
                
In adults, abnormal heart murmurs most often are caused by acquired heart valve disease. This is heart valve disease that develops as the result of another condition. Infections, diseases, and aging can cause heart valve disease.
                
Outlook
                
A heart murmur isn't a disease, and most murmurs are harmless. Innocent murmurs don't cause symptoms. Having one doesn't require you to limit your physical activity or do anything else special. Although you may have an innocent murmur throughout your life, you won't need treatment for it.
                
The outlook and treatment for abnormal heart murmurs depend on the type and severity of the heart problem causing them.
People who have innocent (harmless) heart murmurs don't have any signs or symptoms other than the murmur itself. This is because innocent heart murmurs aren't caused by heart problems.
                
People who have abnormal heart murmurs may have signs or symptoms of the heart problems causing the murmurs. These signs and symptoms may include:
                
Poor eating and failure to grow normally (in infants)
                
Shortness of breath, which may occur only with physical exertion
                
Excessive sweating with minimal or no exertion
                
Chest pain
                
Dizziness or fainting
                
A bluish color on the skin, especially on the fingertips and lips
                
Chronic cough
                
Swelling or sudden weight gain
                
Enlarged liver
                
Enlarged neck veins
                
Signs and symptoms depend on the problem causing the heart murmur and its severity.
A heart murmur isn't a disease. It's an extra or unusual sound heard during the heartbeat. Thus, murmurs themselves don't require treatment. However, if an underlying condition is causing a heart murmur, your doctor may recommend treatment for that condition.
                
Innocent (Harmless) Heart Murmurs
                
Healthy children who have innocent (harmless) heart murmurs don't need treatment. Their heart murmurs aren't caused by heart problems or other conditions.
                
Pregnant women who have innocent heart murmurs due to extra blood volume also don't need treatment. Their heart murmurs should go away after pregnancy.
                
Abnormal Heart Murmurs
                
If you or your child has an abnormal heart murmur, your doctor will recommend treatment for the disease or condition causing the murmur.
                
Some medical conditions, such as anemia or hyperthyroidism, can cause heart murmurs that aren't related to heart disease. Treating these conditions should make the heart murmur go away.
                
If a congenital heart defect is causing a heart murmur, treatment will depend on the type and severity of the defect. Treatment may include medicines or surgery. For more information about treatments for congenital heart defects, go to the Health Topics Congenital Heart Defects article.
                
If acquired heart valve disease is causing a heart murmur, treatment usually will depend on the type, amount, and severity of the disease.
                
Currently, no medicines can cure heart valve disease. However, lifestyle changes and medicines can treat symptoms and help delay complications. Eventually, though, you may need surgery to repair or replace a faulty heart valve.
                
For more information about treatments for heart valve disease, go to the Health Topics Heart Valve Disease article.