Muscle cramps are sudden, involuntary contractions or spasms in one or more of your muscles. They often occur after exercise or at night, lasting a few seconds to several minutes. It is a very common muscle problem.     Muscle cramps can be caused by nerves that malfunction. Sometimes this malfunction is due to a health problem, such as a spinal cord injury or a pinched nerve in the neck or back. Other causes are       - Straining or overusing a muscle    - Dehydration    - A lack of minerals in your diet or the depletion of minerals in your body    - Not enough blood getting to your muscles       Cramps can be very painful. Stretching or gently massaging the muscle can relieve this pain.
Hereditary angiopathy with nephropathy, aneurysms, and muscle cramps (HANAC) syndrome is a genetic condition that causes blood vessels to become fragile. Signs and symptoms include muscle cramps, Raynaud phenomenon, kidney cysts, blood in the urine (typically not visible to the eye), leukoencephalopathy (a change in brain tissue that can be seen on MRI), arteries in the back of the eye that twist and turn abnormally, headaches, and supraventricular arrhythmia. These signs and symptoms do not often cause serious complications, however temporary vision loss due to bleeding in the back of the eye, minor ischemic stroke, and bleeding complications with blood thinner use has been described. While muscle cramps may begin in childhood, many of the other symptoms do not appear until later in life. HANAC syndrome is caused by mutations in the COL4A1 gene. It is passed through families in a autosomal dominant fashion.
Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hereditary angiopathy with nephropathy, aneurysms, and muscle cramps syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Stroke 5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Cerebral aneurysm - Hematuria - Leukoencephalopathy - Muscle cramps - Nephropathy - Renal cyst - Renal insufficiency - Retinal arteriolar tortuosity - Retinal hemorrhage - Supraventricular arrhythmia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 In order to know how HANAC syndrome is affecting you, your doctor may recommend that you undergo a series of imaging tests of the brain and kidney, an eye exam, and blood tests (e.g., serum CK concentration). While there is not a targeted treatment for HANAC syndrome, treatments are available to manage its signs and symptoms, such as drugs to reduce high blood pressure, manage headaches, and treat arrhythmia. People with HANAC syndrome may be regularly monitored (e.g., once a year) for signs and symptoms. In order to reduce the risk for health complications, your doctor may advise you to avoid smoking, activities that can cause head trauma, and blood thinners (anticoagulants).
HANAC syndrome is a rare condition, although the exact prevalence is unknown. At least six affected families have been described in the scientific literature.
Mutations in the COL4A1 gene cause HANAC syndrome. The COL4A1 gene provides instructions for making one component of a protein called type IV collagen. Type IV collagen molecules attach to each other to form complex protein networks. These protein networks are the main component of basement membranes, which are thin sheet-like structures that separate and support cells in many tissues. Type IV collagen networks play an important role in the basement membranes in virtually all tissues throughout the body, particularly the basement membranes surrounding the body's blood vessels (vasculature).  The COL4A1 gene mutations that cause HANAC syndrome result in the production of a protein that disrupts the structure of type IV collagen. As a result, type IV collagen molecules cannot attach to each other to form the protein networks in basement membranes. Basement membranes without these networks are unstable, leading to weakening of the tissues that they surround. In people with HANAC syndrome, the vasculature and other tissues within the kidneys, brain, muscles, eyes, and throughout the body weaken.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of HANAC syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: COL4A1-Related Disorders  - Genetic Testing Registry: Angiopathy, hereditary, with nephropathy, aneurysms, and muscle cramps   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care