Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a rapidly progressive form of muscular dystrophy that occurs primarily in boys. It is caused by a mutation in a gene, called the DMD gene, which encodes the muscle protein dystrophin. Boys with Duchenne muscular dystrophy do not make the dystrophin protein in their muscles. Duchenne mucular dystrophy is inherited in an X-linked recessive fashion; however, it may also occur in people from families without a known family history of the condition. Individuals who have DMD have progressive loss of muscle function and weakness, which begins in the lower limbs. In addition to the skeletal muscles used for movement, DMD may also affect the muscles of the heart.  There is no known cure for Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Treatment is aimed at control of symptoms to maximize the quality of life.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Duchenne muscular dystrophy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Arrhythmia - Calf muscle pseudohypertrophy - Childhood onset - Congestive heart failure - Dilated cardiomyopathy - Elevated serum creatine phosphokinase - Flexion contracture - Gowers sign - Hyperlordosis - Hyporeflexia - Hypoventilation - Intellectual disability, mild - Muscular dystrophy - Muscular hypotonia - Respiratory failure - Scoliosis - Waddling gait - X-linked recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy are inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. A condition is considered X-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation must be present in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A striking characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons. In about two thirds of cases, an affected male inherits the mutation from a mother who carries an altered copy of the DMD gene. The other one third of cases probably result from new mutations in the gene. In X-linked recessive inheritance, a female with one mutated copy of the gene in each cell is called a carrier. She can pass on the altered gene, but usually does not experience signs and symptoms of the disorder. Occasionally, however, females who carry a DMD mutation may have muscle weakness and cramping. These symptoms are typically milder than the severe muscle weakness and atrophy seen in affected males. Females who carry a DMD mutation also have an increased risk of developing heart abnormalities including dilated cardiomyopathy.
 Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is suspected and diagnosed when the following clinical findings are found: a positive family history of DMD, more men affected that women in a family, progressive muscle weakness which is usually greater in the proximal muscles (closest to the trunk of the body) than distal muscles (those farthest away from the hips and shoulders such as those in the hands, feet, lower arms or lower legs), symptoms before the age of 5 years old and wheel chair dependency before age 13. Testing for DMD includes: a blood test which measures the levels of serum creatine phosphokinase (CPK); electromyography which is used to distinguish conditions that only impact the muscles (myotonic) from those that involve that brain and muscles (neurogenic); a skeletal muscle biopsy which is used to detect the presence of specific proteins with a visible label (immunohistochemistry) and molecular genetic testing for deletions, duplications, rearrangements, etc. of genetic material.
 There is no known cure for Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD). Treatment is aimed at the control of symptoms to maximize the quality of life. Individuals with DMD often experience dilated cardiomyopathy (the heart becomes larger and weaker). This can be treated with medications and in severe cases a heart transplant may be necessary. Assistive devices for breathing difficulties may be needed, especially at night.   Physical activity is encouraged for individuals with Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Physical inactivity (such as bed rest) can worsen the muscle disease. Physical therapy may be helpful to maintain muscle strength and function. Orthopedic devices (such as braces and wheelchairs) may improve the ability to move and take care of oneself.   Steroids are usually given to individuals with Duchenne muscular dystrophy to help improve the strength and function of muscles. There are a few different steroids that can be used to treat DMD:   Prednisone is a steroid that has been shown to extend the ability to walk by 2 to 5 years. However, the possible side effects of prednisone include weight gain, high blood pressure, behavior changes, and delayed growth. Deflazacort (another form of prednisone), is used in Europe and believed to have fewer side effects. Oxandrolone, a medication used in a research study, also has similar benefits to prednisone, but with fewer side effects. Cyclosporine has also been used as a treatment for DMD, and has improved muscle function in children. Although, its use is controversial because it can cause myopathy, which is a muscle disease that causes muscle weakness.   There are several other therapies that are also being researched, including exon skipping drugs, coenzyme Q10, idebenone, glutamine, and pentoxifylline.
Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy is a condition that mainly affects skeletal muscles (the muscles used for movement). Affected individuals show severe muscle weakness soon after birth, develop stiff joints (contractures) in their knees and elbows, and may have an unusual range of movement (hypermobility) in their wrists and ankles. This condition is caused by mutations in the COL6A1, COL6A2, and COL6A3 genes. Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy is typically inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. In rare cases, this condition may be inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Congenital muscular dystrophy - Facial palsy - Failure to thrive - Feeding difficulties in infancy - Flexion contracture - Follicular hyperkeratosis - Generalized amyotrophy - High palate - Hip dislocation - Hyperextensibility at wrists - Hyperhidrosis - Increased laxity of ankles - Increased laxity of fingers - Increased variability in muscle fiber diameter - Infantile onset - Joint laxity - Kyphosis - Mildly elevated creatine phosphokinase - Motor delay - Muscle fiber necrosis - Neonatal hypotonia - Nocturnal hypoventilation - Progressive - Protruding ear - Proximal muscle weakness - Recurrent lower respiratory tract infections - Respiratory insufficiency due to muscle weakness - Round face - Scoliosis - Slender build - Spinal rigidity - Talipes equinovarus - Torticollis - Type 1 muscle fiber predominance - Variable expressivity - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Physical therapy, including early mobilization, regular stretching and splinting, is the main focus of supportive care. Respiratory support and night-time ventilation often becomes necessary in the first or second decade of life. Prevention of chest infections may be achieved with the use of antibiotics. Feeding difficulties leading to failure to thrive may be managed by gastrostomy. Surgery may be needed for contractures and scoliosis. Some reports indicate that people with Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy may may benefit from cyclosporin A. More studies into the benefits of this therapy are needed.
Muscular dystrophies are a group of genetic conditions characterized by progressive muscle weakness and wasting (atrophy). The Duchenne and Becker types of muscular dystrophy are two related conditions that primarily affect skeletal muscles, which are used for movement, and heart (cardiac) muscle. These forms of muscular dystrophy occur almost exclusively in males.  Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies have similar signs and symptoms and are caused by different mutations in the same gene. The two conditions differ in their severity, age of onset, and rate of progression. In boys with Duchenne muscular dystrophy, muscle weakness tends to appear in early childhood and worsen rapidly. Affected children may have delayed motor skills, such as sitting, standing, and walking. They are usually wheelchair-dependent by adolescence. The signs and symptoms of Becker muscular dystrophy are usually milder and more varied. In most cases, muscle weakness becomes apparent later in childhood or in adolescence and worsens at a much slower rate.  Both the Duchenne and Becker forms of muscular dystrophy are associated with a heart condition called cardiomyopathy. This form of heart disease weakens the cardiac muscle, preventing the heart from pumping blood efficiently. In both Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy, cardiomyopathy typically begins in adolescence. Later, the heart muscle becomes enlarged, and the heart problems develop into a condition known as dilated cardiomyopathy. Signs and symptoms of dilated cardiomyopathy can include an irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia), shortness of breath, extreme tiredness (fatigue), and swelling of the legs and feet. These heart problems worsen rapidly and become life-threatening in many cases. Males with Duchenne muscular dystrophy typically live into their twenties, while males with Becker muscular dystrophy can survive into their forties or beyond.  A related condition called DMD-associated dilated cardiomyopathy is a form of heart disease caused by mutations in the same gene as Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy, and it is sometimes classified as subclinical Becker muscular dystrophy. People with DMD-associated dilated cardiomyopathy typically do not have any skeletal muscle weakness or wasting, although they may have subtle changes in their skeletal muscle cells that are detectable through laboratory testing.
Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies together affect 1 in 3,500 to 5,000 newborn males worldwide. Between 400 and 600 boys in the United States are born with these conditions each year.
Mutations in the DMD gene cause the Duchenne and Becker forms of muscular dystrophy. The DMD gene provides instructions for making a protein called dystrophin. This protein is located primarily in skeletal and cardiac muscle, where it helps stabilize and protect muscle fibers. Dystrophin may also play a role in chemical signaling within cells.  Mutations in the DMD gene alter the structure or function of dystrophin or prevent any functional dystrophin from being produced. Muscle cells without enough of this protein become damaged as muscles repeatedly contract and relax with use. The damaged fibers weaken and die over time, leading to the muscle weakness and heart problems characteristic of Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies. Mutations that lead to an abnormal version of dystrophin that retains some function usually cause Becker muscular dystrophy, while mutations that prevent the production of any functional dystrophin tend to cause Duchenne muscular dystrophy.  Because Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies result from faulty or missing dystrophin, these conditions are classified as dystrophinopathies.
This condition is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. The gene associated with this condition is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.  In about two-thirds of cases, an affected male inherits the mutation from his mother, who carries one altered copy of the DMD gene. The other one-third of cases probably result from new mutations in the gene in affected males and are not inherited.  In X-linked recessive inheritance, a female with one mutated copy of the gene in each cell is called a carrier. She can pass on the altered gene but usually does not experience signs and symptoms of the disorder. Occasionally, however, females who carry a DMD gene mutation may have muscle weakness and cramping. These symptoms are typically milder than the severe muscle weakness and atrophy seen in affected males. Females who carry a DMD gene mutation also have an increased risk of developing heart abnormalities including cardiomyopathy.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Dilated Cardiomyopathy Overview  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Dystrophinopathies  - Genetic Testing Registry: Becker muscular dystrophy  - Genetic Testing Registry: Duchenne muscular dystrophy  - Genomics Education Programme (UK)  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Becker Muscular Dystrophy  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Dilated Cardiomyopathy  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Tibial muscular dystrophy is a condition that affects the muscles at the front of the lower leg. The signs and symptoms of this condition typically appear after age 35. The first sign is usually weakness and wasting (atrophy) of a muscle in the lower leg called the tibialis anterior. This muscle helps control up-and-down movement of the foot. Weakness in the tibialis anterior muscle makes it difficult or impossible to walk on the heels, but it usually does not interfere significantly with regular walking.  Muscle weakness worsens very slowly in people with tibial muscular dystrophy. Ten to 20 years after the onset of symptoms, weakness may develop in muscles that help extend the toes (long-toe extensors). Weakness in these muscles makes it difficult to lift the toes while walking, a condition known as foot drop. Later in life, about one third of people with tibial muscular dystrophy experience mild to moderate difficulty with walking because of weakness in other leg muscles. However, most affected individuals remain able to walk throughout their lives.  A small percentage of people with tibial muscular dystrophy have a somewhat different pattern of signs and symptoms than those described above. Starting in childhood, these individuals may have generalized muscle weakness, weakness and atrophy of the thigh muscles (quadriceps) or other muscles in the legs, and weakness affecting muscles in the arms.
Tibial muscular dystrophy is most common in Finland, where it is estimated to affect at least 10 per 100,000 people. This condition has also been found in people of Finnish descent living in other countries.  Additionally, tibial muscular dystrophy has been identified in several European families without Finnish ancestry.
Mutations in the TTN gene cause tibial muscular dystrophy. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called titin. Titin plays an important role in muscles the body uses for movement (skeletal muscles) and in heart (cardiac) muscle.  Within muscle cells, titin is an essential component of structures called sarcomeres. Sarcomeres are the basic units of muscle contraction; they are made of proteins that generate the mechanical force needed for muscles to contract. Titin has several functions within sarcomeres. One of its most important jobs is to provide structure, flexibility, and stability to these cell structures. Titin also plays a role in chemical signaling and in assembling new sarcomeres.  Mutations in the TTN gene alter the structure and function of titin. Researchers suspect that these changes may disrupt titin's interactions with other proteins within sarcomeres. Mutations may also interfere with the protein's role in chemical signaling. The altered titin protein disrupts normal muscle contraction, which causes muscles to weaken and waste away over time. It is unclear why these effects are usually limited to muscles in the lower legs.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of tibial muscular dystrophy:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Udd Distal Myopathy  - Genetic Testing Registry: Distal myopathy Markesbery-Griggs type   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care