Myasthenia gravis is disease that causes weakness in the muscles under your control. It happens because of a problem in communication between your nerves and muscles. Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disease. Your body's own immune system makes antibodies that block or change some of the nerve signals to your muscles. This makes your muscles weaker.    Common symptoms are trouble with eye and eyelid movement, facial expression and swallowing. But it can also affect other muscles. The weakness gets worse with activity, and better with rest.    There are medicines to help improve nerve-to-muscle messages and make muscles stronger. With treatment, the muscle weakness often gets much better. Other drugs keep your body from making so many abnormal antibodies. There are also treatments which filter abnormal antibodies from the blood or add healthy antibodies from donated blood. Sometimes surgery to take out the thymus gland helps.    For some people, myasthenia gravis can go into remission and they do not need medicines. The remission can be temporary or permanent.    If you have myasthenia gravis, it is important to follow your treatment plan. If you do, you can expect your life to be normal or close to it.    NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Myasthenia gravis, limb-girdle. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Adult onset - EMG: decremental response of compound muscle action potential to repetitive nerve stimulation - Fatigable weakness - Hashimoto thyroiditis - Mildly elevated creatine phosphokinase - Neoplasm - Ophthalmoparesis - Proximal amyotrophy - Ptosis - Sporadic - Thymoma - Type 2 muscle fiber atrophy - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The possibilities for treatment depend on the specific subtype of congenital myasthenia. Most treatments attempt to improve the signaling between nerve cell and muscle. These drugs include pyridostigmine, fluoxetine, ephedrine, and 3,4-diaminopyridine. Treatments to alter the immune system are not used for this form of myasthenia. There are no treatments to cure the underlying genetic abnormality.
The prognosis depends on the specific subtype of congenital myasthenia, the muscles involved, and the age at onset of symptoms. If a child has difficulty breathing, feeding, or swallowing, they may be vulnerable to pneumonia or respiratory failure. In other cases, weakness is stable and does not worsen over time. In one subtype, weakness improves with time. Life-span is normal in most cases in which respiratory function is not compromised.
The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) and other institutes of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) support research related to congenital myasthenia through grants to major research institutions across the country. Much of this research focuses on finding better ways to prevent, treat and ultimately cure disorders such as congenital myasthenia.
Myasthenia gravis can be controlled. Some medications improve neuromuscular transmission and increase muscle strength, and some suppress the production of abnormal antibodies. These medications must be used with careful medical follow up because they may cause major side effects. Thymectomy, the surgical removal of the thymus gland (which often is abnormal in those with myasthenia gravis), improves symptoms in certain individuals Other therapies include plasmapheresis, a procedure in which abnormal antibodies are removed from the blood, and high-dose intravenous immune globulin, which temporarily modifies the immune system and provides the body with normal antibodies from donated blood.
With treatment, most individuals with myasthenia can significantly improve their muscle weakness. Some case of myasthenia gravis may go into remission temporarily, and muscle weakness may disappear so that medications can be discontinued. In a few cases, the severe weakness of myasthenia gravis may cause respiratory failure, which requires immediate emergency medical care.
Scientists are evaluating new and improving current treatments for myasthenia gravis. Different drugs are being tested, either alone or in combination with existing drug therapies, to see if they are effective in treating the disorder. One study seeks to understand the molecular basis of synaptic transmission in the nervous system. Thymectomy is being studied in individuals who do not have thymoma, to assess long-term benefit the surgery may have over medical therapy alone. And investigators are examining the safety and efficacy of autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation to treat refractory and severe myasthenia gravis.
Myasthenia gravis is a disorder that causes weakness of the skeletal muscles, which are muscles that the body uses for movement. The weakness most often starts in the muscles around the eyes, causing drooping of the eyelids (ptosis) and difficulty coordinating eye movements, which results in blurred or double vision. In a form of the disorder called ocular myasthenia, the weakness remains confined to the eye muscles. In most people with myasthenia gravis, however, additional muscles in the face and neck are affected. Affected individuals may have unusual facial expressions, difficulty holding up the head, speech impairment (dysarthria), and chewing and swallowing problems (dysphagia) that may lead to choking, gagging, or drooling.  Other muscles in the body are also affected in some people with myasthenia gravis. The muscles of the arms and legs may be involved, causing affected individuals to have changes in their gait or trouble with lifting objects, rising from a seated position, or climbing stairs. The muscle weakness tends to fluctuate over time; it typically worsens with activity and improves with rest.  Weakness of the muscles in the chest wall and the muscle that separates the abdomen from the chest cavity (the diaphragm) can cause breathing problems in some people with myasthenia gravis. About 10 percent of people with this disorder experience a potentially life-threatening complication in which these respiratory muscles weaken to the point that breathing is dangerously impaired, and the affected individual requires ventilation assistance. This respiratory failure, called a myasthenic crisis, may be triggered by stresses such as infections or reactions to medications.  People can develop myasthenia gravis at any age. For reasons that are unknown, it is most commonly diagnosed in women younger than age 40 and men older than age 60. It is uncommon in children, but some infants born to women with myasthenia gravis show signs and symptoms of the disorder for the first few days or weeks of life. This temporary occurrence of symptoms is called transient neonatal myasthenia gravis.
Myasthenia gravis affects about 20 per 100,000 people worldwide. The prevalence has been increasing in recent decades, which likely results from earlier diagnosis and better treatments leading to longer lifespans for affected individuals.
Researchers believe that variations in particular genes may increase the risk of myasthenia gravis, but the identity of these genes is unknown. Many factors likely contribute to the risk of developing this complex disorder.  Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disorder, which occurs when the immune system malfunctions and attacks the body's own tissues and organs. In myasthenia gravis, the immune system disrupts the transmission of nerve impulses to muscles by producing a protein called an antibody that attaches (binds) to proteins important for nerve signal transmission. Antibodies normally bind to specific foreign particles and germs, marking them for destruction, but the antibody in myasthenia gravis attacks a normal human protein. In most affected individuals, the antibody targets a protein called acetylcholine receptor (AChR); in others, the antibodies attack a related protein called muscle-specific kinase (MuSK). In both cases, the abnormal antibodies lead to a reduction of available AChR.  The AChR protein is critical for signaling between nerve and muscle cells, which is necessary for movement. In myasthenia gravis, because of the abnormal immune response, less AChR is present, which reduces signaling between nerve and muscle cells. These signaling abnormalities lead to decreased muscle movement and the muscle weakness characteristic of this condition.  It is unclear why the immune system malfunctions in people with myasthenia gravis. About 75 percent of affected individuals have an abnormally large and overactive thymus, which is a gland located behind the breastbone that plays an important role in the immune system. The thymus sometimes develops tumors (thymomas) that are usually noncancerous (benign). However, the relationship between the thymus problems and the specific immune system malfunction that occurs in myasthenia gravis is not well understood.  People with myasthenia gravis are at increased risk of developing other autoimmune disorders, including autoimmune thyroid disease and systemic lupus erythematosus. Gene variations that affect immune system function likely affect the risk of developing myasthenia gravis and other autoimmune disorders.  Some families are affected by an inherited disorder with symptoms similar to those of myasthenia gravis, but in which antibodies to the AChR or MuSK proteins are not present. This condition, which is not an autoimmune disorder, is called congenital myasthenic syndrome.
In most cases, myasthenia gravis is not inherited and occurs in people with no history of the disorder in their family. About 3 to 5 percent of affected individuals have other family members with myasthenia gravis or other autoimmune disorders, but the inheritance pattern is unknown.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of myasthenia gravis:  - Cleveland Clinic  - Genetic Testing Registry: Myasthenia gravis  - Genetic Testing Registry: Myasthenia gravis with thymus hyperplasia  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Acetylcholine Receptor Antibody  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Tensilon Test   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care