Congenital myasthenic syndrome (CMS) is a group of genetic disorders that result in muscle weakness and fatigue. Symptoms can range from mild weakness to progressive disabling weakness. There are three main subtypes of CMS, which are defined by how they affect the connection between muscles and the nervous system: postsynaptic (75-80% of patients), synaptic (14-15% of patients), and presynaptic (7-8% of patients). Identification of the specific subtype is important in patient care for determining the most effective treatment. Mutations in many genes have been found to cause CMS, and most forms of CMS are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. One form of CMS, a postsynaptic form known as slow-channel syndrome congenital myasthenic syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.
How  Almost all types of CMS are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. In order to have the autosomal recessive form of CMS, both parents of an affected individual must be carriers of the disease causing mutation. If a person has CMS, but their partner is not a carrier of a CMS mutation, then their children will be carriers but will not have CMS. If one person has CMS and one person is a carrier of CMS, each child has a 50% chance of either being a carrier of CMS or having the disorder. Only one form of CMS (slow-channel syndrome congenital myasthenic syndrome) has been shown to be inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that if one parent has slow-channel syndrome congenital myasthenic syndrome then all of their children have a 50% chance of inheriting the disorder as well. It is important to discuss this information with your health care provider, such as a genetic counselor, to accurately determine a person's risk for passing on this disorder.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Congenital myasthenic syndrome with episodic apnea. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the immune system - Apneic episodes precipitated by illness, fatigue, stress - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Bulbar palsy - Congenital onset - Decreased miniature endplate potentials - Dysphagia - EMG: decremental response of compound muscle action potential to repetitive nerve stimulation - Fatigable weakness - Generalized hypotonia due to defect at the neuromuscular junction - Ophthalmoparesis - Poor suck - Ptosis - Respiratory distress - Respiratory insufficiency due to muscle weakness - Strabismus - Sudden episodic apnea - Type 2 muscle fiber atrophy - Weak cry - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Congenital myasthenic syndrome is a group of conditions characterized by muscle weakness (myasthenia) that worsens with physical exertion. The muscle weakness typically begins in early childhood but can also appear in adolescence or adulthood. Facial muscles, including muscles that control the eyelids, muscles that move the eyes, and muscles used for chewing and swallowing, are most commonly affected. However, any of the muscles used for movement (skeletal muscles) can be affected in this condition. Due to muscle weakness, affected infants may have feeding difficulties. Development of motor skills such as crawling or walking may be delayed. The severity of the myasthenia varies greatly, with some people experiencing minor weakness and others having such severe weakness that they are unable to walk.  Some individuals have episodes of breathing problems that may be triggered by fevers or infection. Severely affected individuals may also experience short pauses in breathing (apnea) that can lead to a bluish appearance of the skin or lips (cyanosis).
The prevalence of congenital myasthenic syndrome is unknown. At least 600 families with affected individuals have been described in the scientific literature.
Mutations in many genes can cause congenital myasthenic syndrome. Mutations in the CHRNE gene are responsible for more than half of all cases. A large number of cases are also caused by mutations in the RAPSN, CHAT, COLQ, and DOK7 genes. All of these genes provide instructions for producing proteins that are involved in the normal function of the neuromuscular junction. The neuromuscular junction is the area between the ends of nerve cells and muscle cells where signals are relayed to trigger muscle movement.  Gene mutations lead to changes in proteins that play a role in the function of the neuromuscular junction and disrupt signaling between the ends of nerve cells and muscle cells. Disrupted signaling between these cells results in an impaired ability to move skeletal muscles, muscle weakness, and delayed development of motor skills. The respiratory problems in congenital myasthenic syndrome result from impaired movement of the muscles of the chest wall and the muscle that separates the abdomen from the chest cavity (the diaphragm).  Mutations in other genes that provide instructions for proteins involved in neuromuscular signaling have been found to cause some cases of congenital myasthenic syndrome, although these mutations account for only a small number of cases. Some people with congenital myasthenic syndrome do not have an identified mutation in any of the genes known to be associated with this condition.
This condition is most commonly inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.  Rarely, this condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of congenital myasthenic syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Congenital Myasthenic Syndromes  - Genetic Testing Registry: CHRNA1-Related Congenital Myasthenic Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital myasthenic syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital myasthenic syndrome 1B, fast-channel  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital myasthenic syndrome with tubular aggregates 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital myasthenic syndrome, acetazolamide-responsive  - Genetic Testing Registry: Endplate acetylcholinesterase deficiency  - Genetic Testing Registry: Familial infantile myasthenia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Myasthenia, limb-girdle, familial  - Genetic Testing Registry: Myasthenic syndrome, congenital, associated with acetylcholine receptor deficiency  - Genetic Testing Registry: Myasthenic syndrome, slow-channel congenital   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care