Lambert Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS) is a disorder of the neuromuscular junction. The neuromuscular junction is the site where nerve cells meet muscle cells and help activate the muscles. This syndrome occurs when antibodies interfere with electrical impulses between the nerve and muscle cells. It may be associated with other autoimmune diseases, or more commonly coincide with or precede a diagnosis of cancer such as small cell lung cancer. Symptoms may include muscle weakness, a tingling sensation in the affected areas, fatigue, and dry mouth. Treatment of a underlying disorder or cancer is the first priority of treatment.
 Signs and symptoms of Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome may include: Weakness or loss of movement that varies in severity: Difficulty climbing stairs Difficulty lifting objects Need to use hands to arise from sitting or lying positions Difficulty talking Difficulty chewing Drooping head Swallowing difficulty, gagging, or choking Vision changes: Blurry vision Double vision Difficulty maintaining a steady gaze Other symptoms may include blood pressure changes, dizziness upon rising, and dry mouth
 Lambert Eaton myasthenic syndrome is the result of an autoimmune process which causes a disruption of electrical impulses between nerve cells and muscle fibers. In cases where Lambert Eaton myasthenic syndrome appears in association with cancer, the cause may be that the bodys attempt to fight the cancer inadvertently causes it to attack nerve fiber endings, especially the voltage-gated calcium channels found there. The trigger for the cases not associated with cancer is unknown.
 Medications and therapies used to treat Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome may include anticholinesterase agents (e.g., Pyridostigmine), guanidine hydrochloride, plasmapheresis (where blood plasma is removed and replaced with fluid, protein, or donated plasma) or IV immunoglobulins, steroids (e.g., prednisone), azathioprine or cyclosporine, and/or 3,4-diaminopyridine. 3,4-diaminopyridine is available in Europe and may be available in the U.S. on a compassionate use basis. While there has been some evidence that either 3,4-diaminopyridine or IV immunoglobulin can improve muscle strength and nerve to muscle cell communication, the degree of benefit (i.e., how much symptoms are improved) still needs to be determined.