Bethlem myopathy is an inherited movement disorder characterized by progressive muscle weakness and joint stiffness (contractures) in the fingers, wrists, elbows, and ankles. Due to a progressive course, up to two-thirds of people with this condition require a walker or wheelchair after the age of 50. Bethlem myopathy is caused by mutations in the COL6A1, COL6A2, and COL6A3 genes. Most cases are inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern and occur as the result of a new mutation. In rare cases, the disease follows an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. Treatment depends upon individual symptoms, but routinely involves physical therapy. Surgery or other measures may be undertaken as needed.
 Bethlem myopathy is caused by mutations in the COL6A1, COL6A2, and COL6A3 genes. These genes each provide instructions for making one component of a protein called type VI collagen. This protein plays an important role in muscle, particularly skeletal muscle. Type VI collagen makes up part of the extracellular matrix, an intricate lattice that forms in the space between cells and provides structural support to the muscles. Mutations in the type VI collagen genes result in the formation of abnormal type VI collagen or reduced amounts of type VI collagen. This decrease in normal type VI collagen disrupts the extracellullar matrix surrounding muscle cells, leading to progressive muscle weakness and the other signs and symptoms of Bethlem myopathy.
How  Bethlem myopathy is typically inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Most cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. IN some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. In rare cases, the condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
 The treatment for Behtlem myopathy is symptomatic and supportive. This means that treatment is directed at the individual symptoms that are present in each case. There is no cure. In most cases, physical therapy, stretching exercises, splinting, and/or mobility aids are employed. In rare cases, surgery may be needed (i.e. for Achilles tendon contractures or scoliosis).