Deafness and myopia syndrome is rare condition that affects both hearing and vision. Beginning at birth or in early infancy, people with this condition have moderate to profound hearing loss in both ears that generally becomes worse over time. Affected people also develop severe myopia (nearsightedness) later in infancy or early childhood. Deafness and myopia syndrome is caused by changes (mutations) in the SLITRK6 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment aims to improve hearing loss and correct myopia. Cochlear implantation may be an option for some affected people.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Deafness and myopia syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Conductive hearing impairment - Hematuria - Intellectual disability - Myopia - Proteinuria - Severe Myopia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Deafness and myopia syndrome is a disorder that causes problems with both hearing and vision. People with this disorder have moderate to profound hearing loss in both ears that may worsen over time. The hearing loss may be described as sensorineural, meaning that it is related to changes in the inner ear, or it may be caused by auditory neuropathy, which is a problem with the transmission of sound (auditory) signals from the inner ear to the brain. The hearing loss is either present at birth (congenital) or begins in infancy, before the child learns to speak (prelingual).  Affected individuals also have severe nearsightedness (high myopia). These individuals are able to see nearby objects clearly, but objects that are farther away appear blurry. The myopia is usually diagnosed by early childhood.
The prevalence of deafness and myopia syndrome is unknown. Only a few affected families have been described in the medical literature.
Deafness and myopia syndrome is caused by mutations in the SLITRK6 gene. The protein produced from this gene is found primarily in the inner ear and the eye. This protein promotes growth and survival of nerve cells (neurons) in the inner ear that transmit auditory signals. It also controls (regulates) the growth of the eye after birth. In particular, the SLITRK6 protein influences the length of the eyeball (axial length), which affects whether a person will be nearsighted or farsighted, or will have normal vision. The SLITRK6 protein spans the cell membrane, where it is anchored in the proper position to perform its function.  SLITRK6 gene mutations that cause deafness and myopia syndrome result in an abnormally short SLITRK6 protein that is not anchored properly to the cell membrane. As a result, the protein is unable to function normally. Impaired SLITRK6 protein function leads to abnormal nerve development in the inner ear and improperly controlled eyeball growth, resulting in the hearing loss and nearsightedness that occur in deafness and myopia syndrome.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of deafness and myopia syndrome:  - Baby's First Test: Hearing Loss  - EyeSmart: Eyeglasses for Vision Correction  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Deafness and Myopia Syndrome  - Harvard Medical School Center for Hereditary Deafness  - KidsHealth: Hearing Evaluation in Children  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Cochlear Implant  - MedlinePlus Health Topic: Cochlear Implants  - MedlinePlus Health Topic: Hearing Aids  - MedlinePlus Health Topic: Newborn Screening   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care