Laing distal myopathy is a slowly progressive muscle disorder that tends to begin in childhood.   Early symptoms include weakness in the feet and ankles, followed by weakness in the hands and wrists. Weakness in the feet leads to tightening of the Achilles tendon, an inability to lift the big toe, and a high-stepping walk.  Weakness in the hands makes it more difficult to lift the fingers, especially the third and fourth fingers. As the muscle weakness slowly progresses over the course of many years, other muscles of the body (e.g., neck, face, legs, hips, and shoulders) weaken. Most affected people remain mobile throughout life. Life expectancy is normal. Laing distal myopathy is caused by mutations in the MYH7 gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Laing distal myopathy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Dilated cardiomyopathy 7.5% Proximal muscle weakness 7.5% Amyotrophy of ankle musculature - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Childhood onset - Distal muscle weakness - Elevated serum creatine phosphokinase - EMG: neuropathic changes - Facial palsy - Gait disturbance - High palate - Infantile onset - Mildly elevated creatine phosphokinase - Myalgia - Neck muscle weakness - Pes cavus - Phenotypic variability - Ragged-red muscle fibers - Scoliosis - Slow progression - Toe extensor amyotrophy - Type 1 muscle fiber predominance - Weakness of long finger extensor muscles - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
CAV3-related distal myopathy is one form of distal myopathy, a group of disorders characterized by weakness and loss of function affecting the muscles farthest from the center of the body (distal muscles), such as those of the hands and feet. People with CAV3-related distal myopathy experience wasting (atrophy) and weakness of the small muscles in the hands and feet that generally become noticeable in adulthood. A bump or other sudden impact on the muscles, especially those in the forearms, may cause them to exhibit repetitive tensing (percussion-induced rapid contraction). The rapid contractions can continue for up to 30 seconds and may be painful. Overgrowth (hypertrophy) of the calf muscles can also occur in CAV3-related distal myopathy. The muscles closer to the center of the body (proximal muscles) such as the thighs and upper arms are normal in this condition.
The prevalence of CAV3-related distal myopathy is unknown. Only a few affected individuals have been described in the medical literature.
CAV3-related distal myopathy is part of a group of conditions called caveolinopathies, which are muscle disorders caused by mutations in the CAV3 gene. The CAV3 gene provides instructions for making a protein called caveolin-3, which is found in the membrane surrounding muscle cells. This protein is the main component of caveolae, which are small pouches in the muscle cell membrane. Within the caveolae, the caveolin-3 protein acts as a scaffold to organize other molecules that are important for cell signaling and maintenance of the cell structure.  CAV3 gene mutations result in a shortage of caveolin-3 protein in the muscle cell membrane and a reduction in the number of caveolae. Researchers suggest that a shortage of caveolae impairs the structural integrity of muscle cells, interferes with cell signaling, and causes the self-destruction of cells (apoptosis). The resulting degeneration of muscle tissue leads to the signs and symptoms of CAV3-related distal myopathy.  In addition to CAV3-related distal myopathy, CAV3 gene mutations can cause other caveolinopathies including limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, rippling muscle disease, isolated hyperCKemia, and a heart disorder called hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Several CAV3 gene mutations have been found to cause different caveolinopathies in different individuals. It is unclear why a single CAV3 gene mutation may cause different patterns of signs and symptoms, even within the same family.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person has one parent with CAV3-related distal myopathy or another caveolinopathy. Rare cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of caveolinopathies in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of CAV3-related distal myopathy:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Caveolinopathies  - Genetic Testing Registry: CAV3-Related Distal Myopathy  - Genetic Testing Registry: Distal myopathy, Tateyama type  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Electromyography  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Muscle Biopsy   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Although Laing distal myopathy is thought to be rare, its prevalence is unknown. Several families with the condition have been identified worldwide.
Mutations in the MYH7 gene cause Laing distal myopathy. The MYH7 gene provides instructions for making a protein that is found in heart (cardiac) muscle and in type I skeletal muscle fibers. Type I fibers, which are also known as slow-twitch fibers, are one of two types of fibers that make up skeletal muscles. Type I fibers are the primary component of skeletal muscles that are resistant to fatigue. For example, muscles involved in posture, such as the neck muscles that hold the head steady, are made predominantly of type I fibers.  In cardiac and skeletal muscle cells, the protein produced from the MYH7 gene forms part of a larger protein called type II myosin. This type of myosin generates the mechanical force that is needed for muscles to contract. In the heart, regular contractions of cardiac muscle pump blood to the rest of the body. The coordinated contraction and relaxation of skeletal muscles allow the body to move.  It is unknown how mutations in the MYH7 gene cause progressive muscle weakness in people with Laing distal myopathy. Researchers have proposed that these mutations alter the structure of myosin in skeletal muscles, which prevents it from interacting with other proteins. The abnormal myosin gradually impairs the function of type I skeletal muscle fibers.  In most people with Laing distal myopathy, the signs and symptoms of the disorder are limited to weakness of skeletal muscles. Although myosin made with the MYH7 protein is also found in cardiac muscle, it is unclear why heart problems are not a typical feature of this condition.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  In most cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. A small percentage of cases result from new mutations in the gene. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Laing distal myopathy:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Laing Distal Myopathy  - Genetic Testing Registry: Myopathy, distal, 1   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Distal myopathy 2 is a condition characterized by weakness of specific muscles that begins in adulthood. It is a form of muscular dystrophy that specifically involves muscles in the throat, lower legs, and forearms. Muscles farther from the center of the body, like the muscles of the lower legs and forearms, are known as distal muscles.  Muscle weakness in the ankles is usually the first symptom of distal myopathy 2. The weakness can also affect muscles in the hands, wrists, and shoulders. At first, the muscle weakness may be on only one side of the body, but both sides are eventually involved. This muscle weakness can slowly worsen and make actions like walking and lifting the fingers difficult.  Another characteristic feature of distal myopathy 2 is weakness of the vocal cords and throat. This weakness initially causes the voice to sound weak or breathy (hypophonic). Eventually, the voice becomes gurgling, hoarse, and nasal. The weakness can also cause difficulty swallowing (dysphagia).
The prevalence of distal myopathy 2 is unknown. At least two families with the condition have been described in the scientific literature.
A mutation in the MATR3 gene has been identified in people with distal myopathy 2. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called matrin 3, which is found in the nucleus of the cell as part of the nuclear matrix. The nuclear matrix is a network of proteins that provides structural support for the nucleus and aids in several important nuclear functions.  The function of the matrin 3 protein is unknown. This protein can attach to (bind) RNA, which is a chemical cousin of DNA. Some studies indicate that matrin 3 binds and stabilizes a type of RNA called messenger RNA (mRNA), which provides the genetic blueprint for proteins. Matrin 3 may also bind certain abnormal RNAs that might lead to nonfunctional or harmful proteins, thereby blocking the formation of such proteins. Other studies suggest that the matrin 3 protein may be involved in cell survival.  The MATR3 gene mutation identified in people with distal myopathy 2 changes a single protein building block (amino acid) in the matrin 3 protein. The effect of this mutation on the function of the protein is unknown, although one study suggests that the mutation may change the location of the protein in the nucleus. Researchers are working to determine how this gene mutation leads to the signs and symptoms of distal myopathy 2.
Distal myopathy 2 is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered MATR3 gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of distal myopathy 2:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Myopathy, distal, 2  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Muscular Dystrophy  - National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: Muscular Dystrophy: Hope Through Research   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care