 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Fingerprint body myopathy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of metabolism/homeostasis - Myopathy - X-linked inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Inclusion body myopathy 2, also known as hereditary inclusion body myopathy (HIBM), GNE-related myopathy,  distal myopathy with rimmed vacuoles, and Nonaka myopathy, is an inherited condition that primarily affects the skeletal muscles (the muscles that the body uses to move). This disorder is characterized by muscle weakness that appears in late adolescence or early adulthood and worsens over time. Early symptoms typically develop in the 20s and 30s and may include difficulty running or walking, tripping, weakness in the index finger, and frequent loss of balance. Inclusion body myopathy 2 is caused by mutations in the GNE gene. The condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment is focused on managing individual symptoms.
 Inclusion body myopathy 2 is caused by mutations in the GNE gene. The GNE gene provides instructions for making an enzyme responsible for making sialic acid, a simple sugar that attaches to the ends of more complex molecules on the surface of cells. People with inclusion body myopathy 2 have lower levels of sialic acid on the surface of certain proteins that are important for muscle function. This shortage of sialic acid leads to the progressive muscle wasting and disability seen in patients with inclusion body myopathy 2. Researchers are currently working towards a better understanding of how this shortage of sialic acid leads to the progressive muscle weakness in people with this condition.
How  Inclusion body myopathy 2 is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
 Currently, there is no cure and no way to prevent the progression of a Inclusion body myopathy 2.[5665] Treatment is focused on managing individual symptoms. People with this condition are often evaluated and managed by a multidisciplinary team including neurologists and physiatrists, as well as physical and occupational therapists.[5666] Researchers at Hadassah, USC, UCLA, UCSD, Johns Hopkins University, Canada, NIH, and Japan are contributing towards finding an effective treatment. Information about treatments which are on the horizon are described in a publication from the Advancement of Research for Myopathies which can be accessed by clicking here.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Reducing body myopathy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Dilated cardiomyopathy 5% Areflexia - Elevated serum creatine phosphokinase - Flexion contracture - Frequent falls - Hyperlordosis - Hyporeflexia - Increased variability in muscle fiber diameter - Kyphosis - Proximal muscle weakness - Rapidly progressive - Respiratory insufficiency due to muscle weakness - Scoliosis - Short neck - Spinal rigidity - X-linked dominant inheritance - X-linked inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Inclusion body myopathy with early-onset Paget disease and frontotemporal dementia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Facial palsy 5% Abnormality of pelvic girdle bone morphology - Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Back pain - Difficulty climbing stairs - Distal amyotrophy - Dysphasia - Dystonia - Elevated alkaline phosphatase of bone origin - Elevated serum creatine phosphokinase - Frontal cortical atrophy - Frontotemporal dementia - Gait disturbance - Limb muscle weakness - Lumbar hyperlordosis - Myopathy - Pelvic girdle amyotrophy - Pelvic girdle muscle atrophy - Pelvic girdle muscle weakness - Proximal muscle weakness - Rimmed vacuoles - Scapular winging - Shoulder girdle muscle atrophy - Shoulder girdle muscle weakness - Temporal cortical atrophy - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Inclusion body myopathy with early-onset Paget disease and frontotemporal dementia (IBMPFD) is a condition that can affect the muscles, bones, and brain.  The first symptom of IBMPFD is often muscle weakness (myopathy), which typically appears in mid-adulthood. Weakness first occurs in muscles of the hips and shoulders, making it difficult to climb stairs and raise the arms above the shoulders. As the disorder progresses, weakness develops in other muscles in the arms and legs. Muscle weakness can also affect respiratory and heart (cardiac) muscles, leading to life-threatening breathing difficulties and heart failure.  About half of all adults with IBMPFD develop a disorder called Paget disease of bone. This disorder most often affects bones of the hips, spine, and skull, and the long bones of the arms and legs. Bone pain, particularly in the hips and spine, is usually the major symptom of Paget disease. Rarely, this condition can weaken bones so much that they break (fracture).  In about one-third of people with IBMPFD, the disorder also affects the brain. IBMPFD is associated with a brain condition called frontotemporal dementia, which becomes noticeable in a person's forties or fifties. Frontotemporal dementia progressively damages parts of the brain that control reasoning, personality, social skills, speech, and language. People with this condition initially may have trouble speaking, remembering words and names (dysnomia), and using numbers (dyscalculia). Personality changes, a loss of judgment, and inappropriate social behavior are also hallmarks of the disease. As the dementia worsens, affected people ultimately become unable to speak, read, or care for themselves.  People with IBMPFD usually live into their fifties or sixties.
Although the prevalence of IBMPFD is unknown, this condition is rare. It has been identified in about 26 families.
Mutations in the VCP gene cause IBMPFD. The VCP gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called valosin-containing protein, which has a wide variety of functions within cells. One of its most critical jobs is to help break down (degrade) proteins that are abnormal or no longer needed.  Mutations in the VCP gene alter the structure of valosin-containing protein, disrupting its ability to break down other proteins. As a result, excess and abnormal proteins may build up in muscle, bone, and brain cells. The proteins form clumps that interfere with the normal functions of these cells. It remains unclear how damage to muscle, bone, and brain cells leads to the specific features of IBMPFD.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of IBMPFD:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Inclusion Body Myopathy with Paget Disease of Bone and/or Frontotemporal Dementia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Inclusion body myopathy with early-onset paget disease and frontotemporal dementia   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Inclusion body myopathy 2 is a condition that primarily affects skeletal muscles, which are muscles that the body uses for movement. This disorder causes muscle weakness that appears in late adolescence or early adulthood and worsens over time.  The first sign of inclusion body myopathy 2 is weakness of a muscle in the lower leg called the tibialis anterior. This muscle helps control up-and-down movement of the foot. Weakness in the tibialis anterior alters the way a person walks and makes it difficult to run and climb stairs. As the disorder progresses, weakness also develops in muscles of the upper legs, hips, shoulders, and hands. Unlike most forms of myopathy, inclusion body myopathy 2 usually does not affect the quadriceps, which are a group of large muscles at the front of the thigh. This condition also does not affect muscles of the eye or heart, and it does not cause neurological problems. Weakness in leg muscles makes walking increasingly difficult, and most people with inclusion body myopathy 2 require wheelchair assistance within 20 years after signs and symptoms appear.  People with the characteristic features of inclusion body myopathy 2 have been described in several different populations. When the condition was first reported in Japanese families, researchers called it distal myopathy with rimmed vacuoles (DMRV) or Nonaka myopathy. When a similar disorder was discovered in Iranian Jewish families, researchers called it rimmed vacuole myopathy or hereditary inclusion body myopathy (HIBM). It has since become clear that these conditions are variations of a single disorder caused by mutations in the same gene.
More than 200 people with inclusion body myopathy 2 have been reported. Most are of Iranian Jewish descent; the condition affects an estimated 1 in 1,500 people in this population. Additionally, at least 15 people in the Japanese population have been diagnosed with this disorder. Inclusion body myopathy 2 has also been found in several other ethnic groups worldwide.
Mutations in the GNE gene cause inclusion body myopathy 2. The GNE gene provides instructions for making an enzyme found in cells and tissues throughout the body. This enzyme is involved in a chemical pathway that produces sialic acid, which is a simple sugar that attaches to the ends of more complex molecules on the surface of cells. By modifying these molecules, sialic acid influences a wide variety of cellular functions including cell movement (migration), attaching cells to one another (adhesion), signaling between cells, and inflammation.  The mutations responsible for inclusion body myopathy 2 reduce the activity of the enzyme produced from the GNE gene, which decreases the production of sialic acid. As a result, less of this simple sugar is available to attach to cell surface molecules. Researchers are working to determine how a shortage of sialic acid leads to progressive muscle weakness in people with inclusion body myopathy 2. Sialic acid is important for the normal function of many different cells and tissues, so it is unclear why the signs and symptoms of this disorder appear to be limited to the skeletal muscles.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of inclusion body myopathy 2:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: GNE-Related Myopathy  - Genetic Testing Registry: Inclusion body myopathy 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Nonaka myopathy   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care