N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency is type of urea cycle disorder. It causes toxic levels of ammonia to accumulate in the blood. Signs and symptoms in newborns may include a lack of energy, unwillingness to eat, seizures, unusual body movements, and poorly controlled breathing or body temperature. Complications may include coma, developmental delay, and learning disability. Some people have a less severe form of the deficiency with earliest symptoms manifesting later in life, particularly following high-protein meals, illness, or other stress. Signs and symptoms may include sudden vomiting, lack of coordination, confusion, and coma. N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency is caused by mutations in the NAGS gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for N-acetylglutamate synthetase deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Aggressive behavior - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cognitive impairment - Coma - Confusion - Failure to thrive - Hyperammonemia - Lethargy - Respiratory distress - Seizures - Vomiting - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency is an inherited disorder that causes ammonia to accumulate in the blood. Ammonia, which is formed when proteins are broken down in the body, is toxic if the levels become too high. The nervous system is especially sensitive to the effects of excess ammonia.  N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency may become evident in the first few days of life. An infant with this condition may be lacking in energy (lethargic) or unwilling to eat, and have a poorly controlled breathing rate or body temperature. Some babies with this disorder may experience seizures or unusual body movements, or go into a coma. Complications of N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency may include developmental delay and intellectual disability.  In some affected individuals, signs and symptoms of N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency are less severe, and do not appear until later in life. Some people with this form of the disorder cannot tolerate high-protein foods such as meat. They may experience sudden episodes of ammonia toxicity, resulting in vomiting, lack of coordination, confusion or coma, in response to illness or other stress.
N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency is a very rare disorder. Only a few cases have been reported worldwide, and the overall incidence is unknown.
Mutations in the NAGS gene cause N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency.  N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency belongs to a class of genetic diseases called urea cycle disorders. The urea cycle is a sequence of reactions that occurs in liver cells. This cycle processes excess nitrogen, generated when protein is used by the body, to make a compound called urea that is excreted by the kidneys.  The NAGS gene provides instructions for making the enzyme N-acetylglutamate synthase, which helps produce a compound called N-acetylglutamate. This compound is needed to activate another enzyme, carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I, which controls the first step of the urea cycle.  In people with N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency, N-acetylglutamate is not available in sufficient quantities, or is not present at all. As a result, urea cannot be produced normally, and excess nitrogen accumulates in the blood in the form of ammonia. This accumulation of ammonia causes the neurological problems and other signs and symptoms of N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Urea Cycle Disorders Overview  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hyperammonemia, type III  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hereditary Urea Cycle Abnormality   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care