Nance-Horan syndrome is a rare genetic disorder that may be evident at birth. It is characterized by teeth abnormalities and cataracts, resulting in poor vision. Additional eye abnormalities are also often present, including a very small cornea and nystagmus. In some cases, the condition may also be associated with physical abnormalities and/or intellectual disability. The range and severity of symptoms may vary greatly from one person to another, even among affected members of the same family. Nance-Horan syndrome is caused by a mutation in the NHS gene and is inherited as an X-linked dominant trait, which means that both males and females can be affected, but males often have more severe symptoms.The treatment is directed toward the specific symptoms that are apparent in the individual.
 Nance-Horan syndrome is caused by a mutation in the NHS gene, which is located on the X chromosome. Some patients have losses (deletions) of part of the chromosome X short arm (p) within the region involving the NHS gene and other genes that are located in this region. These patients may have more problems and the problems may be more serious.
How  Nance-Horan syndrome is inherited as an X-linked dominant trait. In X-linked dominant inheritance, both males and females can be affected by a condition. However, affected males tend to have more severe features than females. X-linked conditions result from mutations of a gene located on an X chromosome. Females have two X chromosomes, but males have one X chromosome and one Y chromosome. In females, disease traits resulting from the abnormal copy of a gene on one X chromosome can be 'masked' by the normal copy of the gene on the other X chromosome. Because only one functioning X chromosome is required in males and females, one of the X chromosomes in each cell of a female is essentially 'turned off,' usually in a random pattern (X chromosome inactivation). Therefore, if the X chromosome with the gene mutation is activated in some cells, female carriers may have some mild features of the disorder. However, since males only have one X chromosome, they will likely fully express a condition if they inherit a gene mutation that is located on the X chromosome.