Neonatal progeroid syndrome is a rare genetic syndrome characterized by an aged appearance at birth. Other signs and symptoms include intrauterine growth restriction, feeding difficulties, distinctive craniofacial features, hypotonia, developmental delay and mild to severe intellectual disability. In most cases, affected infants pass away before age 7 months, but rare reports exist of survival into the teens or early 20s. Although the exact underlying cause of neonatal progeroid syndrome is unknown, it is likely a genetic condition that is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive.
 The exact underlying cause of neonatal progeroid syndrome is unknown. Scientists suspect that it is a genetic condition; however, a disease-causing gene has not been identified.
 Although the underlying genetic cause of neonatal progeroid syndrome is unknown, studies suggest that it is likely inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that to be affected, a person must have a mutation in both copies of the responsible gene in each cell. The parents of an affected person usually each carry one mutated copy of the gene and are referred to as carriers. Carriers typically do not show signs or symptoms of the condition. When two carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be a carrier like each of the parents, and a 25% chance to not have the condition and not be a carrier.
 A diagnosis of neonatal progeroid syndrome is made based on the presence of characteristic signs and symptoms. Rarely, a diagnosis may be suspected before birth if concerning features are viewed on ultrasound; however, most cases are diagnosed shortly after birth.
 Because neonatal progeroid syndrome affects many different systems of the body, medical management is often provided by a team of doctors and other healthcare professionals. Treatment varies based on the signs and symptoms present in each person. For example, a feeding tube may be recommended in infants with feeding difficulties who have trouble putting on weight.