Nephrotic syndrome is a collection of symptoms that indicate kidney damage. Nephrotic syndrome includes the following:
                
- proteinurialarge amounts of protein in the urine  - hyperlipidemiahigher than normal fat and cholesterol levels in the blood  - edema, or swelling, usually in the legs, feet, or ankles and less often in the hands or face  - hypoalbuminialow levels of albumin in the blood
                
Albumin is a protein that acts like a sponge, drawing extra fluid from the body into the bloodstream where it remains until removed by the kidneys. When albumin leaks into the urine, the blood loses its capacity to absorb extra fluid from the body, causing edema.
                
Nephrotic syndrome results from a problem with the kidneys filters, called glomeruli. Glomeruli are tiny blood vessels in the kidneys that remove wastes and excess fluids from the blood and send them to the bladder as urine.
                
As blood passes through healthy kidneys, the glomeruli filter out the waste products and allow the blood to retain cells and proteins the body needs. However, proteins from the blood, such as albumin, can leak into the urine when the glomeruli are damaged. In nephrotic syndrome, damaged glomeruli allow 3 grams or more of protein to leak into the urine when measured over a 24-hour period, which is more than 20 times the amount that healthy glomeruli allow.
Nephrotic syndrome can be caused by diseases that affect only the kidneys, such as focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) or membranous nephropathy. Diseases that affect only the kidneys are called primary causes of nephrotic syndrome. The glomeruli are usually the targets of these diseases for reasons that are not fully understood. In FSGSthe most common primary cause of nephrotic syndromescar tissue forms in parts of the glomeruli. In membranous nephropathy, immune molecules form harmful deposits on the glomeruli.
                
Nephrotic syndrome can also be caused by systemic diseases, which are diseases that affect many parts of the body, such as diabetes or lupus. Systemic diseases that affect the kidneys are called secondary causes of nephrotic syndrome. More than 50 percent of nephrotic syndrome cases in adults have secondary causes, with diabetes being the most common.1
In addition to proteinuria, hyperlipidemia, edema, and hypoalbumina, people with nephrotic syndrome may experience
                
- weight gain  - fatigue  - foamy urine  - loss of appetite
The loss of different proteins from the body can lead to a variety of complications in people with nephrotic syndrome. Blood clots can form when proteins that normally prevent them are lost through the urine. Blood clots can block the flow of blood and oxygen through a blood vessel. Loss of immunoglobulinsimmune system proteins that help fight disease and infectionleads to an increased risk of infections. These infections include pneumonia, a lung infection; cellulitis, a skin infection; peritonitis, an abdominal infection; and meningitis, a brain and spine infection. Medications given to treat nephrotic syndrome can also increase the risk of these infections. Other complications of nephrotic syndrome include
                
- hypothyroidisma condition in which the thyroid gland does not produce enough thyroid hormone to meet the bodys needs  - anemiaa condition in which red blood cells are fewer or smaller than normal, which means less oxygen is carried to the bodys cells  - coronary artery disease, also called coronary heart diseaseheart disease caused by narrowing of the arteries that supply blood to the heart  - high blood pressure, also called hypertensiona condition in which blood flows through the blood vessels with a force greater than normal  - acute kidney injurysudden and temporary loss of kidney function
Treating nephrotic syndrome includes addressing the underlying cause as well as taking steps to reduce high blood pressure, edema, high cholesterol, and the risks of infection. Treatment usually includes medications and changes in diet.
                
Medications that lower blood pressure can also significantly slow the progression of kidney disease causing nephrotic syndrome. Two types of blood pressure lowering medications, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), have proven effective in slowing the progression of kidney disease by reducing the pressure inside the glomeruli and thereby reducing proteinuria. Many people require two or more medications to control their blood pressure. In addition to an ACE inhibitor or an ARB, a diuretica medication that aids the kidneys in removing fluid from the bloodcan also be useful in helping to reduce blood pressure as well as edema. Beta blockers, calcium channel blockers, and other blood pressure medications may also be needed.
                
Statin medications may be given to lower cholesterol.
                
People with nephrotic syndrome should receive the pneumococcal vaccine, which helps protect against a bacterium that commonly causes infection, and yearly flu shots.
                
Blood thinning medications are usually only given to people with nephrotic syndrome who develop a blood clot; these medications are not used as a preventive measure.
                
Nephrotic syndrome may go away once the underlying cause has been treated. More information about treating the underlying causes of nephrotic syndrome is provided in the NIDDK health topic, Glomerular Diseases.
Eating, diet, and nutrition have not been shown to play a role in causing or preventing nephrotic syndrome in adults. For people who have developed nephrotic syndrome, limiting intake of dietary sodium, often from salt, and fluid may be recommended to help reduce edema. A diet low in saturated fat and cholesterol may also be recommended to help control hyperlipidemia.
Childhood nephrotic syndrome is not a disease in itself; rather, it is a group of symptoms that
                
- indicate kidney damageparticularly damage to the glomeruli, the tiny units within the kidney where blood is filtered  - result in the release of too much protein from the body into the urine
                
When the kidneys are damaged, the protein albumin, normally found in the blood, will leak into the urine. Proteins are large, complex molecules that perform a number of important functions in the body.
                
The two types of childhood nephrotic syndrome are
                
- primarythe most common type of childhood nephrotic syndrome, which begins in the kidneys and affects only the kidneys  - secondarythe syndrome is caused by other diseases
                
A health care provider may refer a child with nephrotic syndrome to a nephrologista doctor who specializes in treating kidney disease. A child should see a pediatric nephrologist, who has special training to take care of kidney problems in children, if possible. However, in many parts of the country, pediatric nephrologists are in short supply, so the child may need to travel. If traveling is not possible, some nephrologists who treat adults can also treat children.
The signs and symptoms of childhood nephrotic syndrome may include
                
- edemaswelling, most often in the legs, feet, or ankles and less often in the hands or face  - albuminuriawhen a childs urine has high levels of albumin  - hypoalbuminemiawhen a childs blood has low levels of albumin  - hyperlipidemiawhen a childs blood cholesterol and fat levels are higher than normal
                
In addition, some children with nephrotic syndrome may have
                
- blood in their urine  - symptoms of infection, such as fever, lethargy, irritability, or abdominal pain  - loss of appetite  - diarrhea  - high blood pressure
The complications of childhood nephrotic syndrome may include
                
- infection. When the kidneys are damaged, a child is more likely to develop infections because the body loses proteins that normally protect against infection. Health care providers will prescribe medications to treat infections. Children with childhood nephrotic syndrome should receive the pneumococcal vaccine and yearly flu shots to prevent those infections. Children should also receive age-appropriate vaccinations, although a health care provider may delay certain live vaccines while a child is taking certain medications.  - blood clots. Blood clots can block the flow of blood and oxygen through a blood vessel anywhere in the body. A child is more likely to develop clots when he or she loses proteins through the urine. The health care provider will treat blood clots with blood-thinning medications.  - high blood cholesterol. When albumin leaks into the urine, the albumin levels in the blood drop. The liver makes more albumin to make up for the low levels in the blood. At the same time, the liver makes more cholesterol. Sometimes children may need treatment with medications to lower blood cholesterol levels.
Researchers have not found a way to prevent childhood nephrotic syndrome when the cause is idiopathic or congenital.
Children who have nephrotic syndrome may need to make changes to their diet, such as
                
- limiting the amount of sodium, often from salt, they take in each day  - reducing the amount of liquids they drink each day  - eating a diet low in saturated fat and cholesterol to help control elevated cholesterol levels
                
Parents or caretakers should talk with the childs health care provider before making any changes to the childs diet.
                
More information is provided in the NIDDK health topic, Nutrition for Chronic Kidney Disease in Children.