The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Leukoencephalopathy - dystonia - motor neuropathy . If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal motor neuron morphology - Abnormality of saccadic eye movements - Abnormality of thalamus morphology - Azoospermia - Head tremor - Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism - Hyposmia - Intention tremor - Leukoencephalopathy - Peripheral neuropathy - Torticollis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN) is a rare neuropathy characterized by progressive, asymmetric muscle weakness and atrophy (wasting). Signs and symptoms include weakness in the hands and lower arms; cramping; involuntary contractions or twitching; and atrophy of affected muscles. MMN is thought to be due to an abnormal immune response, but the underlying cause is not clear. Most people treated with intravenous immune globulin (IVIG) have rapid improvement in weakness, but maintenance IVIG is usually required for sustained improvement.
 Signs and symptoms of multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN) may include weakness; cramping; involuntary contractions or twitching; and wasting (atrophy) of affected muscles. Atrophy occurs late in the course of the condition. Muscles of the hands and lower arms are most commonly affected, but muscles of the lower limbs may also be involved. The symptoms are often asymmetrical, meaning that they differ on the right and left side of the body.
 The exact underlying cause of multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN) is poorly understood. It is considered an immune-mediated disorder (due to an abnormal immune system response), both because IVIG therapy improves symptoms, and many patients have anti-GM1 antibodies. Research to further understand the cause of MMN is underway.
 We are not aware of any evidence that multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN) is inherited or of any reports of familial cases (occurring in more than one person in a family). Furthermore, to our knowledge, no specific genes known to be associated with MMN have been identified.
 Multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN) is considered treatable with intravenous immune globulin (IVIG). Early treatment shortly after symptoms begin is recommended. Most people have a fairly rapid improvement in weakness with IVIG, but the improvement generally does not last beyond a few months. Maintenance IVIG infusions are usually needed every two to six weeks. For those with severe disease whose symptoms don't respond to IVIG (or for those who become resistant), treatment options are limited. Several reports have suggested that cyclophosphamide may be partially effective.
Multifocal motor neuropathy is a progressive muscle disorder characterized by muscle weakness in the hands, with differences from one side of the body to the other in the specific muscles involved. It affects men much more than women. Symptoms also include muscle wasting, cramping, and involuntary contractions or twitching of the leg muscles. The disorder is sometimes mistaken for amyotrophic laterial sclerosis (ALS, or Lou Gehrig's disease) but unlike ALS, it is treatable. An early and accurate diagnosis allows patients to recover quickly.
Treatment for multifocal motor neuropathy varies. Some individuals experience only mild, modest symptoms and require no treatment. For others, treatment generally consists of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) or immunosuppressive therapy with cyclophosphamide.
Improvement in muscle strength usually begins within 3 to 6 weeks after treatment is started. Most patients who receive treatment early experience little, if any, disability. However, there is evidence of slow progression over many years.
The NINDS supports a broad range of research on neuromuscular disorders with the goal of finding ways to prevent, treat, and, ultimately, cure them.