Neurofibromatosis is a genetic disorder of the nervous system. It mainly affects how nerve cells form and grow. It causes tumors to grow on nerves. You can get neurofibromatosis from your parents, or it can happen because of a mutation (change) in your genes. Once you have it, you can pass it along to your children. Usually the tumors are benign, but sometimes they can become cancerous.    There are three types of neurofibromatosis:        - Type 1 (NF1) causes skin changes and deformed bones. It usually starts in childhood. Sometimes the symptoms are present at birth.    - Type 2 (NF2) causes hearing loss, ringing in the ears, and poor balance. Symptoms often start in the teen years.    - Schwannomatosis causes intense pain. It is the rarest type.       Doctors diagnose the different types based on the symptoms. Genetic testing is also used to diagnose NF1 and NF2. There is no cure. Treatment can help control symptoms. Depending on the type of disease and how serious it is, treatment may include surgery to remove tumors, radiation therapy, and medicines.    NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a rare, inherited condition that is characterized primarily by changes in skin coloring and the development of multiple benign tumors along the nerves of the skin, brain, and other parts of the body. The severity of the condition and the associated signs and symptoms vary significantly from person to person. NF1 is caused by changes (mutations) in the NF1 gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. In approximately 50% of cases, the condition is inherited from an affected parent. Other cases may result from new (de novo) mutations in the gene which occur in people with no history of the condition in their family. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
 Neurofibromatosis type 1 is caused by changes (mutations) in the NF1 gene. NF1 is a tumor suppressor gene, which means that it encodes a protein that stops cells from growing and dividing too rapidly or in an uncontrolled way. Mutations in NF1 result in an abnormal protein that is unable to carry out its normal role. This contributes to the development of the many different types of tumors found in neurofibromatosis type 1. People with neurofibromatosis type 1 are typically born with one mutated copy of the NF1 gene in each cell and are, therefore, genetically predisposed to develop the tumors associated with the condition. For a tumor to form, two copies of the NF1 gene must be altered. The mutation in the second copy of the NF1 gene is considered a somatic mutation because it occurs during a person's lifetime and is not inherited. Almost everyone who is born with one NF1 mutation acquires a second mutation in many cells and develops the tumors characteristic of neurofibromatosis type 1.
How  Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that a person only needs a change (mutation) in one copy of the responsible gene in each cell to have a genetic predisposition to the tumors associated with NF1. In approximately half of cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from an affected parent. Other cases may result from new (de novo) mutations in the gene; these cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. A person with NF1 has a 50% chance with each pregnancy of passing along the altered gene to his or her child.
 Although it is usually not necessary for diagnosis, genetic testing is available for NF1, the gene known to cause neurofibromatosis type 1. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal testing are possible if the disease-causing mutation in the family is known. The Genetic Testing Registry (GTR) is a centralized online resource for information about genetic tests. The intended audience for the GTR is health care providers and researchers. Patients and consumers with specific questions about a genetic test should contact a health care provider or a genetics professional. How is neurofibromatosis type 1 diagnosed? The diagnosis of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is usually based on the presence of characteristic signs and symptoms. Specifically, doctors look for two or more of the following features to make a diagnosis of NF1: Six or more cafe-au-lait spots (measuring more than 5 mm across in children and more than 15 mm across in adolescents and adults) Two or more neurofibromas of any type or one plexiform neurofibroma (a neurofibroma that involves many nerves) Freckling in the underarm and/or groin Optic glioma Two or more Lisch nodules (clumps of pigment in the colored part of the eye that do not interfere with vision) Bone abnormalities including sphenoid dysplasia (absence of bone surrounding the eye) or tibial pseudarthrosis (incomplete healing of a fracture) A parent, sibling, or child who has been diagnosed with NF1 Because many of the features associated with NF1 develop with age, it can sometimes take several years to make a diagnosis in children without a family history of the condition. Genetic testing for changes (mutations) in the NF1 gene is available, but it is often not necessary. Prenatal testing and preimplantation genetic diagnosis is only an option if the disease-causing mutation in the family is known.
 The treatment of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person. There is currently no way to prevent or stop the growth of the tumors associated with NF1. Neurofibromas located on or just below the skin that are disfiguring or irritating may be surgically removed. Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors are generally treated with complete surgical excision (when possible) although some cases may require the addition of chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy. Most optic gliomas associated with NF1 do not cause any symptoms and therefore, do not require treatment; however, optic gliomas that threaten vision may be treated with surgery and/or chemotherapy. Surgery may also be recommended to correct some of the bone malformations (such as scoliosis) associated with NF1. GeneReview's Web site offers more specific information regarding the treatment and management of NF1. Please click on the link to access this resource.
 Neurofibromatosis is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that to be affected, a person only needs a change (mutation) in one copy of the responsible gene in each cell. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from an affected parent. Other cases may result from new (de novo) mutations in the gene. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. A person with neurofibromatosis has a 50% chance with each pregnancy of passing along the altered gene to his or her child.
Treatment may include surgery, focused radiation, or chemotherapy. Surgery to remove NF2 tumors completely is one option. Surgery for vestibular schwannomas does not restore hearing and usually reduces hearing. Sometimes surgery is not performed until functional hearing is lost completely. Surgery may result in damage to the facial nerve and some degree of facial paralysis. Focused radiation of vestibular schwannoma carries of a lower risk of facial paralysis than open surgery, but is more effective o shrinking small to moderate tumors than larger tumors. Chemotherapy with a drug that targets the blood vessels of vestibular schwannoma can reduce the size of the tumor and improves hearing, but some tumors do not respond at all and sometimes respond only temporarily. Bone malformations can often be corrected surgically, and surgery can also correct cataracts and retinal abnormalities. Pain usually subsides when tumors are removed completely.
In most cases, symptoms of NF1 are mild, and individuals live normal and productive lives. In some cases, however, NF1 can be severely debilitating and may cause cosmetic and psychological issues. The course of NF2 varies greatly among individuals. Loss of hearing in both ears develops in most individuals with NF2. In some cases of NF2, the damage to nearby vital structures, such as other cranial nerves and the brain stem, can be life-threatening. Most individuals with schwannomatosis have significant pain. In some extreme cases the pain will be severe and disabling.
Neurofibromatosis type 1 is a condition characterized by changes in skin coloring (pigmentation) and the growth of tumors along nerves in the skin, brain, and other parts of the body. The signs and symptoms of this condition vary widely among affected people.  Beginning in early childhood, almost all people with neurofibromatosis type 1 have multiple caf-au-lait spots, which are flat patches on the skin that are darker than the surrounding area. These spots increase in size and number as the individual grows older. Freckles in the underarms and groin typically develop later in childhood.  Most adults with neurofibromatosis type 1 develop neurofibromas, which are noncancerous (benign) tumors that are usually located on or just under the skin. These tumors may also occur in nerves near the spinal cord or along nerves elsewhere in the body. Some people with neurofibromatosis type 1 develop cancerous tumors that grow along nerves. These tumors, which usually develop in adolescence or adulthood, are called malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. People with neurofibromatosis type 1 also have an increased risk of developing other cancers, including brain tumors and cancer of blood-forming tissue (leukemia).  During childhood, benign growths called Lisch nodules often appear in the colored part of the eye (the iris). Lisch nodules do not interfere with vision. Some affected individuals also develop tumors that grow along the nerve leading from the eye to the brain (the optic nerve). These tumors, which are called optic gliomas, may lead to reduced vision or total vision loss. In some cases, optic gliomas have no effect on vision.  Additional signs and symptoms of neurofibromatosis type 1 include high blood pressure (hypertension), short stature, an unusually large head (macrocephaly), and skeletal abnormalities such as an abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis). Although most people with neurofibromatosis type 1 have normal intelligence, learning disabilities and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) occur frequently in affected individuals.
Neurofibromatosis type 1 occurs in 1 in 3,000 to 4,000 people worldwide.
Mutations in the NF1 gene cause neurofibromatosis type 1.  The NF1 gene provides instructions for making a protein called neurofibromin. This protein is produced in many cells, including nerve cells and specialized cells surrounding nerves (oligodendrocytes and Schwann cells). Neurofibromin acts as a tumor suppressor, which means that it keeps cells from growing and dividing too rapidly or in an uncontrolled way. Mutations in the NF1 gene lead to the production of a nonfunctional version of neurofibromin that cannot regulate cell growth and division. As a result, tumors such as neurofibromas can form along nerves throughout the body. It is unclear how mutations in the NF1 gene lead to the other features of neurofibromatosis type 1, such as caf-au-lait spots and learning disabilities.
Neurofibromatosis type 1 is considered to have an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. People with this condition are born with one mutated copy of the NF1 gene in each cell. In about half of cases, the altered gene is inherited from an affected parent. The remaining cases result from new mutations in the NF1 gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.  Unlike most other autosomal dominant conditions, in which one altered copy of a gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder, two copies of the NF1 gene must be altered to trigger tumor formation in neurofibromatosis type 1. A mutation in the second copy of the NF1 gene occurs during a person's lifetime in specialized cells surrounding nerves. Almost everyone who is born with one NF1 mutation acquires a second mutation in many cells and develops the tumors characteristic of neurofibromatosis type 1.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of neurofibromatosis type 1:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Neurofibromatosis 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Neurofibromatosis, type 1  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Neurofibromatosis-1   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Neurofibromatosis type 2 is a disorder characterized by the growth of noncancerous tumors in the nervous system. The most common tumors associated with neurofibromatosis type 2 are called vestibular schwannomas or acoustic neuromas. These growths develop along the nerve that carries information from the inner ear to the brain (the auditory nerve). Tumors that occur on other nerves are also commonly found with this condition.  The signs and symptoms of neurofibromatosis type 2 usually appear during adolescence or in a person's early twenties, although they can begin at any age. The most frequent early symptoms of vestibular schwannomas are hearing loss, ringing in the ears (tinnitus), and problems with balance. In most cases, these tumors occur in both ears by age 30. If tumors develop elsewhere in the nervous system, signs and symptoms vary according to their location. Complications of tumor growth can include changes in vision, numbness or weakness in the arms or legs, and fluid buildup in the brain. Some people with neurofibromatosis type 2 also develop clouding of the lens (cataracts) in one or both eyes, often beginning in childhood.
Neurofibromatosis type 2 has an estimated incidence of 1 in 33,000 people worldwide.
Mutations in the NF2 gene cause neurofibromatosis type 2. The NF2 gene provides instructions for making a protein called merlin (also known as schwannomin). This protein is produced in the nervous system, particularly in Schwann cells, which surround and insulate nerve cells (neurons) in the brain and spinal cord. Merlin acts as a tumor suppressor, which means that it keeps cells from growing and dividing too rapidly or in an uncontrolled way. Although its exact function is unknown, this protein is likely also involved in controlling cell movement, cell shape, and communication between cells. Mutations in the NF2 gene lead to the production of a nonfunctional version of the merlin protein that cannot regulate the growth and division of cells. Research suggests that the loss of merlin allows cells, especially Schwann cells, to multiply too frequently and form the tumors characteristic of neurofibromatosis type 2.
Neurofibromatosis type 2 is considered to have an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. People with this condition are born with one mutated copy of the NF2 gene in each cell. In about half of cases, the altered gene is inherited from an affected parent. The remaining cases result from new mutations in the NF2 gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.  Unlike most other autosomal dominant conditions, in which one altered copy of a gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder, two copies of the NF2 gene must be altered to trigger tumor formation in neurofibromatosis type 2. A mutation in the second copy of the NF2 gene occurs in Schwann cells or other cells in the nervous system during a person's lifetime. Almost everyone who is born with one NF2 mutation acquires a second mutation (known as a somatic mutation) in these cells and develops the tumors characteristic of neurofibromatosis type 2.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of neurofibromatosis type 2:  - Boston Children's Hospital  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Neurofibromatosis 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Neurofibromatosis, type 2  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Acoustic Neuroma  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Neurofibromatosis 2  - Neurofibromatosis Clinic, Massachusetts General Hospital   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care