Neuromyelitis optica (NMO) is an autoimmune disease of the central nervous system (CNS) that predominantly affects the optic nerves and spinal cord. It is sometimes also referred to as NMO spectrum disorder.In NMO, the body's immune system mistakenly attacks healthy cells and proteins in the body, must often those in the spinal cord and eyes. Individuals with NMO develop optic neuritis, which caused pain in the eye and vision loss. Individuals also develop transverse myelitis, which causes weakness or paralysis of arms and legs,and numbness, along with loss of bladder and bowel control Magnetic resonance imaging of the spine often shows an abnormality that extends over long segments of the spinal cord. Individuals may also develop episodes of severe nausea and vomiting, with hiccups from involvement of a part of the brain that ocntrols vomiting The disease is caused by abnormal autoantibodies that bind to a protein called aquaporin-4. Binding of the aquaporin-4 antibody activates other components of the immune system, causing inflammation and damage to these cells. This also results in the brain and spinal cord the loss of myelin, the fatty substance that acts as insulation around nerve fibers and helps nerve signals move from cell to cell.
                
NMO is different from multiple sclerosis (MS). Attacks are usually more severe in NMO than in MS, and NMO is treated differently than MS. Most individuals with NMO experience clusters of attacks days to months or years apart, followed by partial recovery during periods of remission. Women are more often affected by NMO than men. African Americans are at greater risk of the disease than are Caucasians. The onset of NMO varies from childhood to adulthood, with two peaks, one in childhood and the other in adults in their 40s.
There is no cure for NMO and no FDA-approved therapies, but there are therapies to treat an attack while it is happening, to reduce symptoms, and to prevent relapses.NMO relapses and attacks are often treated with corticosteroid drugs and plasma exchange (also called plasmapheresis, a process used to remove harmful antibodies from the bloodstream). Immunosuppressvie drugs used to prevent attacks include mycophenolate mofetil, rituximab, and azathioprine. Pain, stiffness, muscle spasms, and bladder and bowel control problems can be managed with medicaitons and therapies. Individuals with major disability will require the combined efforts to physical and occupational therapists, along with social services professionals to address complex rehabilitation needs.
Most individuals with NMO have an unpredictable, relapsing course of disease with attacks occurring months or years apart. Disability is cumulative, the result of each attack damaging new areas of the central nervous system. Some individuals are severely affected by NMO and can lose vision in both eyes and the use of their arms and legs. Most individuals experience some degree of permanent limb weakness or vision loss from NMO. However, reducing the number of attacks with immunosuppressive medications may help prevent with accumulation of disability. Rarely, muscle weakness can be severe enough to cause breathing difficulties and may require the use of artificial ventilation.
The mission of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) is to seek fundamental knowledge of the brain and nervous system and to use that knowledge to reduce the burden of neurological disease. The NINDS is a component of the National Institutes of Health, the leading supporter of biomedical research in the world. NINDS researchers are working to better understand the process by which the immune system destroys or attacks the nerve insulating substance called myelin in autoijmune diseases or disorders. Other work focuses on strategies to repair demyelinated spinal cords, including approaches using cell transplantation. this research may lead to a grater understanding of the mechanisms responsible for damaging myelin and may ultimately provide a means to prevent and treat transverse myelitis An NINDS-funded study comparing clinical MRI and lumbar puncture of healthy individuals to those with symptoms of immune-related central nervous system damage hopes to identify processes or mechanisms to inhibit or minimize spinal tissue damage and enhance recovery mechanisms. Multiple studies are looking at ways to target different components of the immune system known to be involved in NMO spectrum disorders to allow more directly targeted treatment of this disease.
Neuromyelitis optica affects approximately 1 to 2 per 100,000 people worldwide. Women are affected by this condition more frequently than men.
No genes associated with neuromyelitis optica have been identified. However, a small percentage of people with this condition have a family member who is also affected, which indicates that there may be one or more genetic changes that increase susceptibility. It is thought that the inheritance of this condition is complex and that many environmental and genetic factors are involved in the development of the condition.  The aquaporin-4 protein (AQP4), a normal protein in the body, plays a role in neuromyelitis optica. The aquaporin-4 protein is found in several body systems but is most abundant in tissues of the central nervous system. Approximately 70 percent of people with this disorder produce an immune protein called an antibody that attaches (binds) to the aquaporin-4 protein. Antibodies normally bind to specific foreign particles and germs, marking them for destruction, but the antibody in people with neuromyelitis optica attacks a normal human protein; this type of antibody is called an autoantibody. The autoantibody in this condition is called NMO-IgG or anti-AQP4.  The binding of the NMO-IgG autoantibody to the aquaporin-4 protein turns on (activates) the complement system, which is a group of immune system proteins that work together to destroy pathogens, trigger inflammation, and remove debris from cells and tissues. Complement activation leads to the inflammation of the optic nerve and spinal cord that is characteristic of neuromyelitis optica, resulting in the signs and symptoms of the condition.  The levels of the NMO-IgG autoantibody are high during episodes of neuromyelitis optica, and the levels decrease between episodes with treatment of the disorder. However, it is unclear what triggers episodes to begin or end.
Neuromyelitis optica is usually not inherited. Rarely, this condition is passed through generations in families, but the inheritance pattern is unknown.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of neuromyelitis optica:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Neuromyelitis optica  - National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: Neuromyelitis Optica Information Page  - The Transverse Myelitis Association: Acute Treatments   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care