 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Infantile axonal neuropathy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Cognitive impairment 90% Decreased nerve conduction velocity 90% Developmental regression 90% Facial palsy 90% Hemiplegia/hemiparesis 90% Impaired pain sensation 90% Neurological speech impairment 90% Optic atrophy 90% Abnormality of movement 50% Hypertonia 50% Incoordination 50% Microcephaly 50% Muscular hypotonia 50% Nystagmus 50% Sensorineural hearing impairment 50% Hypothyroidism 7.5% Seizures 7.5% Type I diabetes mellitus 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Giant axonal neuropathy (GAN) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by abnormally large and dysfunctional axons (the specialized extensions of nerve cells that are required for the transmission of nerve impulses). The condition typically appears in infancy or early childhood with severe peripheral motor and sensory neuropathy (affecting movement and sensation in the arms and legs). Early signs include difficulty walking, lack of coordination, and loss of strength. Over time, the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord) becomes involved, causing a gradual decline in mental function, loss of control of body movements, and seizures. Giant axonal neuropathy is caused by mutations in the GAN gene. It follows and autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. Management is directed by a multidisciplinary team with the goal of optimizing intellectual and physical development.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Giant axonal neuropathy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Intellectual disability 5% Abnormal pyramidal signs - Abnormality of the cerebellum - Abnormality of the hand - Areflexia of lower limbs - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Curly hair - Decreased number of peripheral myelinated nerve fibers - Distal amyotrophy - Distal muscle weakness - Distal sensory impairment - Dysarthria - Facial palsy - Hyperreflexia - Hyporeflexia of lower limbs - Juvenile onset - Morphological abnormality of the pyramidal tract - Motor axonal neuropathy - Nystagmus - Pes cavus - Pes planus - Phenotypic variability - Proximal muscle weakness - Scoliosis - Sensory axonal neuropathy - Slow progression - Spastic paraplegia - Steppage gait - Talipes equinovarus - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Giant axonal neuropathy (GAN) is a rare inherited genetic disorder that affects both the central and peripheral nervous systems. The majority of children with GAN will begin to show symptoms of the disease sometime before five years of age. Signs of GAN usually begin in the peripheral nervous system, which controls movement and sensation in the arms, legs, and other parts of the body. The typical symptoms of GAN are clumsiness and muscle weakness that progresses from a waddling gait to a pronounced difficulty in walking. Additional symptoms include numbness or lack of feeling in the arms and legs, seizures, nystagmus (rapid back and forth movement of the eyes), and impaired cognitive development. A characteristic sign of the disease is dull, tightly curled hair that is markedly different from the parents in color and texture.
                
Researchers have discovered more than 20 different mutations associated with GAN in a gene, GAN1, which makes a protein called gigaxonin. These mutations disrupt the regulation or production of gigaxonin in the nervous system. As a result, axons, which are the long tails of neurons that allow them to communicate with other nerve cells, swell up with tangled filaments and become abnormally large. Eventually these axons deteriorate and cause problems with movement and sensation since neurons are no longer able to communicate with each other.
                
Doctors diagnose GAN by using several tests, including one that measures nerve conduction velocity, a brain MRI, and a peripheral nerve biopsy (in which a bit of tissue from a peripheral nerve is removed and examined to look for swollen axons). A definitive diagnosis using genetic testing is available on a research basis only.
                
GAN is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means that both parents of a child with GAN have to carry a copy of the mutated gene. Parents, typically, will show no signs of the disease.
Treatment is symptomatic. Children with GAN and their families usually work with a medical team that includes a pediatric neurologist, orthopedic surgeon, physiotherapist, psychologist, and speech and occupational therapists. The major goals of treatment are to maximize intellectual and physical development and minimize their deterioration as time passes. Many children with GAN begin with normal intellectual development and are able to attend a regular school program. Children should be monitored at least once a year to assess their intellectual abilities and to look for the presence of neurological deterioration.
GAN generally progresses slowly as neurons degenerate and die. Most children have problems with walking in the early stages of the disorder. Later they may lose sensation, coordination, strength, and reflexes in their arms and legs. As time goes on, the brain and spinal cord may become involved, causing a gradual decline in mental function, loss of control of body movement, and seizures. Most children become wheelchair dependent in the second decade of life. Some children may survive into early adulthood.
The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) supports research related to GAN through grants to major medical institutions across the country. Much of this research focuses on finding better ways to prevent, treat, and ultimately cure inherited neurological disorders such as GAN.
Giant axonal neuropathy is an inherited condition involving dysfunction of a specific type of protein in nerve cells (neurons). The protein is essential for normal nerve function because it forms neurofilaments. Neurofilaments make up a structural framework that helps to define the shape and size of the neurons. This condition is characterized by abnormally large and dysfunctional axons, which are the specialized extensions of nerve cells that are required for the transmission of nerve impulses.  Giant axonal neuropathy generally appears in infancy or early childhood. It progresses slowly as neuronal injury becomes more severe. Signs of giant axonal neuropathy usually begin in the peripheral nervous system, which governs movement and sensation in the arms, legs, and other parts of the body. Most individuals with this disorder first have problems with walking. Later they may lose sensation, coordination, strength, and reflexes in their limbs. Hearing and visual problems may also occur. Extremely kinky hair (as compared to others in the family) is characteristic of giant axonal neuropathy, occurring in almost all affected people.  As the disorder progresses, the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system) may become involved, causing a gradual decline in mental function, loss of control of body movement, and seizures.
Giant axonal neuropathy is a very rare disorder; the incidence is unknown.
Giant axonal neuropathy is caused by mutations in the GAN gene, which provides instructions for making a protein called gigaxonin. Some GAN gene mutations change the shape of the protein, affecting how it binds to other proteins to form a functional complex. Other mutations prevent cells from producing any gigaxonin protein.  Gigaxonin is involved in a cellular function that destroys and gets rid of excess or damaged proteins using a mechanism called the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Neurons without functional gigaxonin accumulate excess neurofilaments in the axon, causing the axons to become distended. These giant axons do not transmit signals properly and eventually deteriorate, resulting in problems with movement and other nervous system dysfunction.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of giant axonal neuropathy:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Giant Axonal Neuropathy  - Genetic Testing Registry: Giant axonal neuropathy   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care