Acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis - also known as Sweet syndrome - is a skin condition marked by fever, inflammation of the joints (arthritis), and painful skin lesions that appear mainly on the face, neck, back and arms. Although middle-aged women are most likely to develop this condition, it may also affect men, older adults and even infants. The exact cause of acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis often isn't known. In some people, it's triggered by an infection, illness or certain medications. This condition can also occur with some types of cancer and other serious health problems. Most often, it isn't serious and will clear on its own in a few months. Healing is much more rapid, however, with treatment.
 In many cases, the cause of acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis is unknown (idiopathic). But sometimes, it can be a sign of an immune system response to one of the following: An upper respiratory tract infection, such as a chest infection or strep throat Blood disorders, especially acute myelogenous leukemia, a cancer of the blood and bone marrow Inflammatory bowel disease, such as ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease Bowel or breast cancer Pregnancy Rheumatoid arthritis An injury at the site where the rash appears, such as an insect bite or needle prick Certain medications, including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
  Left untreated, acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis not associated with a more serious condition may disappear on its own within one to three months. Medications can improve skin lesions and associated symptoms in just two or three days, with the worst of the lesions disappearing within one to four weeks. Doctors usually prescribe systemic corticosteroids (prednisone or prednisolone) to treat this condition. These oral anti-inflammatory medications reduce redness, itching, swelling and allergic reactions.  In the pediatric population, long-term use of corticosteroids can cause problems with linear growth, blood pressure, and blood glucose levels. Children may also have social sequelae associated with their use. Therefore, attempts are usually made to treat children with steroid-sparing drugs. Other treatment options include indomethacin, colchicine, potassium iodide, dapsone, cyclosporine, etretinate, pentoxifylline, clofazimine, doxycycline, metronidazole, isotretinoin, methotrexate, cyclophosphamide, chlorambucil, and interferon alpha, all of which have shown some success in the resolution of symtpoms.   With or without treatment, the lesions rarely leave a mark or scar when they eventually disappear. Even after the lesions have resolved, treatment may continue, as recurrence of the condition is common. If an underlying cause can be identified, it should be treated (i.e. resection of solid tumors, treatment of infections, and discontinuation of causative medication). Successful therapy of the underlying disorder may promote resolution of acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis and prevent recurrences.