Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS) is a condition that increases the risk to develop various cancerous and noncancerous tumors. The most common cancer diagnosed in affected people is basal cell carcinoma, which often develops during adolescence or early adulthood. People with NBCCS may also have benign jaw tumors called keratocystic odontogenic tumors. Other tumors that may occur include medulloblastomas, and fibromas in the heart or ovaries. Additional features in people with NBCCS may include skin pits on the hands and feet; large head size (macrocephaly); and/or bone abnormalities of the spine, ribs, or skull. NBCCS is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner and is caused by mutations in the PTCH1 gene.
How  Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS) is caused by a change (mutation) in the PTCH1 gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant way.  This means that if a close relative (such as a parent or sibling) has NBCCS, there is a 50% chance that an individual may also have inherited this condition, and a 50% chance that they did not.  Because the symptoms of NBCCS can vary widely and are sometimes mild or subtle, it is not always possible to tell which relatives have inherited the condition based on physical features alone.  As such, individuals who have a close relative with NBCCS may consider genetic testing to determine whether they inherited NBCCS.
 The features of nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS) should be evaluated and treated by specialists who are experienced with the condition (such as oral surgeons, dermatologists, plastic surgeons, and medical geneticists). If a medulloblastoma is detected early enough, it may be treated by surgery and chemotherapy. Jaw keratocysts usually need to be surgically removed. Early treatment of basal cell carcinomas is necessary to prevent long-term cosmetic problems, particularly on the face. Surgical removal is often supplemented by other treatments such as cryotherapy, laser treatment, and/or photodynamic therapy. Radiation therapy is not recommended because it can provoke the development of more tumors. Some people may need long term treatment with oral retinoids such as isotretinoin or acitretin. Cardiac fibromas may not cause symptoms, but they should be monitored by a cardiologist. If ovarian fibromas need surgical treatment, it is typically recommended that ovarian tissue is preserved even though it involves a risk of recurrence.