A giant congenital nevus is a dark-colored, often hairy patch of skin that is present at birth (congenital). It grows proportionally to the child. A congenital pigmented nevus is considered giant if by adulthood it is larger than 20cm (about 8 inches) in diameter. Giant congenital nevi can occur in people of any racial or ethnic background and on any area of the body. They result from localized genetic changes in the fetus that lead to excessive growth of melanocytes, the cells in the skin that are responsible for skin color. People with giant congenital nevi may experience a number of complications ranging from fragile, dry, or itchy skin to neurological problems like neurocutaneous melanocytosis (excess pigment cells in the brain or spinal cord). They also have an increased risk of developing malignant melanoma, a type of skin cancer.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Giant congenital nevus. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Hypertrichosis 50% Hydrocephalus 7.5% Hypopigmented skin patches 7.5% Pruritus 7.5% Sarcoma 7.5% Seizures 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Broad forehead - Broad nasal tip - Congenital giant melanocytic nevus - Cutaneous melanoma - Deep philtrum - Full cheeks - Long philtrum - Narrow nasal ridge - Open mouth - Periorbital fullness - Prominence of the premaxilla - Prominent forehead - Round face - Short nose - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Treatment for giant congenital nevus depends on the age of the affected individual as well as the size, location, and thickness of the nevus. Surgery may be done to remove the nevus, particularly when there is a concern that it may develop into a melanoma. When small nevi are removed, the surrounding skin can often be pulled together with stitches. Larger nevi may need to be removed in several stages and full-thickness skin grafts may be needed to help the skin heal following surgery. Laser treatments may be used for superficial skin imperfections, including reducing pigment and hair, but cannot completely remove the nevus. Affected individuals should self-monitor and continue to have regular skin examinations to check for benign or malignant tumors. Early awareness will allow their physicians  to adjust treatment protocols  accordingly. Children are most likely to show neurological signs before primary school and can respond well to a range of symptomatic therapies.
Giant congenital melanocytic nevus occurs in approximately 1 in 20,000 newborns worldwide.
NRAS gene mutations cause most cases of giant congenital melanocytic nevus. Rarely, mutations in the BRAF gene are responsible for this condition.  The proteins produced from these genes are involved in a process known as signal transduction by which signals are relayed from outside the cell to the cell's nucleus. Signals relayed by the N-Ras and BRAF proteins instruct the cell to grow and divide (proliferate) or to mature and take on specialized functions (differentiate). To transmit signals, these proteins must be turned on; when the proteins are turned off, they do not relay signals to the cell's nucleus.  The NRAS or BRAF gene mutations responsible for giant congenital melanocytic nevus are somatic, meaning that they are acquired during a person's lifetime and are present only in certain cells. These mutations occur early in embryonic development during the growth and division (proliferation) of cells that develop into melanocytes. Somatic NRAS or BRAF gene mutations cause the altered protein in affected cells to be constantly turned on (constitutively active) and relaying signals. The overactive protein may contribute to the development of giant congenital melanocytic nevus by allowing cells that develop into melanocytes to grow and divide uncontrollably, starting before birth.
This condition is generally not inherited but arises from a mutation in the body's cells that occurs after conception. This alteration is called a somatic mutation. A somatic mutation in one copy of the NRAS or BRAF gene is sufficient to cause this disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of giant congenital melanocytic nevus:  - Cleveland Clinic: The Facts About Melanoma  - Genetic Testing Registry: Giant pigmented hairy nevus  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Giant Congenital Nevus  - Nevus Outreach: Treatment Options  - Primary Care Dermatology Society   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care