Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome (NCBRS) is a very rare condition characterized by severe intellectual disability and various physical features. Signs and symptoms may include seizures, short stature, sparse hair, distinctive facial characteristics, short fingers and toes (brachydactyly), and prominent joints in the fingers and toes (interphalangeal joints). Features of the condition can worsen over time. NCBRS is caused by changes (mutations) in the SMARCA2 gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. All cases reported to date have been sporadic, occurring in people with no family history of NCBRS.
 Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome (NCBRS) is caused by mutations in the SMARCA2 gene, which is located on the small arm of chromosome 9. All mutations that have been identified in affected people have been either missense mutations or in-frame deletions. There may be some correlations between specific types of mutations and some of the features that result (called genotype-phenotype correlations), but more studies are needed to draw definitive conclusions.
How  Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome (NCBRS) is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that having a change (mutation) in only one of the two copies of the responsible gene in each cell is enough to cause features of the condition. All known cases of NCBRS have been sporadic. This means it is thought that the mutation occurred for the first time in each affected person (called a de novo mutation). There have not been reports of NCBRS being inherited from a parent, or recurring in any family (with the exception of one pair of identical twins).
Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome is likely a rare condition; approximately 75 cases have been reported in the scientific literature.
Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome is caused by mutations in the SMARCA2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making one piece (subunit) of a group of similar protein complexes known as SWI/SNF complexes. These complexes regulate gene activity (expression) by a process known as chromatin remodeling. Chromatin is the network of DNA and proteins that packages DNA into chromosomes. The structure of chromatin can be changed (remodeled) to alter how tightly DNA is packaged. Chromatin remodeling is one way gene expression is regulated during development; when DNA is tightly packed, gene expression is lower than when DNA is loosely packed. To provide energy for chromatin remodeling, the SMARCA2 protein uses a molecule called ATP.  The SMARCA2 gene mutations that cause Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome result in the production of an altered protein that interferes with the normal function of the SWI/SNF complexes. These altered proteins are able to form SWI/SNF complexes, but the complexes are nonfunctional. As a result, they cannot participate in chromatin remodeling. Disturbance of this regulatory process alters the activity of many genes, which likely explains the diverse signs and symptoms of Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Nicolaides-Baraitser Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care