Niemann-Pick disease is an inherited condition involving lipid metabolism, which is the breakdown, transport, and use of fats and cholesterol in the body. In people with this condition, abnormal lipid metabolism causes harmful amounts of lipids to accumulate in the spleen, liver, lungs, bone marrow, and brain. Niemann-Pick disease type A appears during infancy and is characterized by an enlarged liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly), failure to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive), and progressive deterioration of the nervous system. Due to the involvement of the nervous system, Niemann-Pick disease type A is also known as the neurological type. There is currently no effective treatment for this condition and those who are affected generally do not survive past early childhood. Niemann-Pick disease type A is caused by mutations in the SMPD1 gene. It is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Niemann-Pick disease type A. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Cherry red spot of the macula 50% Athetosis - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Bone-marrow foam cells - Constipation - Diffuse reticular or finely nodular infiltrations - Failure to thrive - Feeding difficulties in infancy - Foam cells with lamellar inclusion bodies - Hepatomegaly - Hyporeflexia - Infantile onset - Intellectual disability - Lymphadenopathy - Microcytic anemia - Muscle weakness - Muscular hypotonia - Osteoporosis - Protuberant abdomen - Recurrent respiratory infections - Rigidity - Sea-blue histiocytosis - Short stature - Spasticity - Splenomegaly - Vomiting - Xanthomatosis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 There is no specific treatment for this disease. Supportive care from the following specialists may be helpful for managing the symptoms:  A pulmonologist for respiratory problems A cardiologist for heart problems Liver and spleen specialists Nutritionists Physical therapists A gastroenterologist Learning specialists You can learn more about ongoing research efforts to better understand the natural history of this condition and identify treatment options in the Research section of our web page.
Niemann-Pick disease (NP) refers to a group of inherited metabolic disorders known as lipid storage diseases. Lipids (fatty materials such as waxes, fatty acids, oils, and cholesterol) and proteins are usually broken down into smaller components to provide energy for the body. In Niemann-Pick disease, harmful quantities of lipids accumulate in the brain, spleen, liver, lungs, and bone marrow. Neurological symptoms may include ataxia (lack of muscle control during voluntary movements such as walking), loss of muscle tone, brain degeneration, increased sensitivity to touch, spasticity (stiff muscles and awkward movement), and slurred speech. Other symptoms may include feeding and swallowing difficulties, eye paralysis, learning problems, and an enlarged liver and spleen. There may be clouding of the cornea and a characteristic cherry-red halo develops around the center of the retina. The disease has three categories. Type A, the most severe form, occurs in early infancy and is seen primarily in Jewish families. It is characterized by progressive weakness, an enlarged liver and spleen, swollen lymph nodes, and profound brain damage by six months of age. Children with this type rarely live beyond 18 months. Type B usually occurs in the pre-teen years, with symptoms that include ataxia and peripheral neuropathy. The brain is generally not affected. Other symptoms include enlarged liver and spleen, and pulmonary difficulties. In types A and B, insufficient activity of an enzyme called sphingomyelinase causes the build up of toxic amounts of sphingomyelin, a fatty substance present in every cell of the body. Type C may appear early in life or develop in the teen or adult years. It is caused by a lack of the NPC1 or NPC2 proteins. Affected individuals may have extensive brain damage that can cause an inability to look up and down, difficulty in walking and swallowing, and progressive loss of vision and hearing. There may be moderate enlargement of the spleen and liver. Individuals wit Type C who share a common ancestral background in Nova Scotia were previously referred to as Type D.
There is currently no cure for Niemann-Pick disease. Treatment is supportive. Children usually die from infection or progressive neurological loss. There is currently no effective treatment for persons with type A. Bone marrow transplantation has been attempted in a few individuals with type B. The development of enzyme replacement and gene therapies might also be helpful for those with type B. restricting one's diet does not prevent the buildup of lipids in cells and tissues.
Infants with type A die in infancy. Children with Type B may live a comparatively long time, but may require supplemental oxygen because of lung impairment. The life expectancy of persons with type C varies: some individuals die in childhood while others who appear to be less severely affected can live into adulthood.
Niemann-Pick disease is a condition that affects many body systems. It has a wide range of symptoms that vary in severity. Niemann-Pick disease is divided into four main types: type A, type B, type C1, and type C2. These types are classified on the basis of genetic cause and the signs and symptoms of the condition.  Infants with Niemann-Pick disease type A usually develop an enlarged liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly) by age 3 months and fail to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive). The affected children develop normally until around age 1 year when they experience a progressive loss of mental abilities and movement (psychomotor regression). Children with Niemann-Pick disease type A also develop widespread lung damage (interstitial lung disease) that can cause recurrent lung infections and eventually lead to respiratory failure. All affected children have an eye abnormality called a cherry-red spot, which can be identified with an eye examination. Children with Niemann-Pick disease type A generally do not survive past early childhood.  Niemann-Pick disease type B usually presents in mid-childhood. The signs and symptoms of this type are similar to type A, but not as severe. People with Niemann-Pick disease type B often have hepatosplenomegaly, recurrent lung infections, and a low number of platelets in the blood (thrombocytopenia). They also have short stature and slowed mineralization of bone (delayed bone age). About one-third of affected individuals have the cherry-red spot eye abnormality or neurological impairment. People with Niemann-Pick disease type B usually survive into adulthood.  The signs and symptoms of Niemann-Pick disease types C1 and C2 are very similar; these types differ only in their genetic cause. Niemann-Pick disease types C1 and C2 usually become apparent in childhood, although signs and symptoms can develop at any time. People with these types usually develop difficulty coordinating movements (ataxia), an inability to move the eyes vertically (vertical supranuclear gaze palsy), poor muscle tone (dystonia), severe liver disease, and interstitial lung disease. Individuals with Niemann-Pick disease types C1 and C2 have problems with speech and swallowing that worsen over time, eventually interfering with feeding. Affected individuals often experience progressive decline in intellectual function and about one-third have seizures. People with these types may survive into adulthood.
Niemann-Pick disease types A and B is estimated to affect 1 in 250,000 individuals. Niemann-Pick disease type A occurs more frequently among individuals of Ashkenazi (eastern and central European) Jewish descent than in the general population. The incidence within the Ashkenazi population is approximately 1 in 40,000 individuals.  Combined, Niemann-Pick disease types C1 and C2 are estimated to affect 1 in 150,000 individuals; however, type C1 is by far the more common type, accounting for 95 percent of cases. The disease occurs more frequently in people of French-Acadian descent in Nova Scotia. In Nova Scotia, a population of affected French-Acadians were previously designated as having Niemann-Pick disease type D, however, it was shown that these individuals have mutations in the gene associated with Niemann-Pick disease type C1.
Niemann-Pick disease types A and B is caused by mutations in the SMPD1 gene. This gene provides instructions for producing an enzyme called acid sphingomyelinase. This enzyme is found in lysosomes, which are compartments within cells that break down and recycle different types of molecules. Acid sphingomyelinase is responsible for the conversion of a fat (lipid) called sphingomyelin into another type of lipid called ceramide. Mutations in SMPD1 lead to a shortage of acid sphingomyelinase, which results in reduced break down of sphingomyelin, causing this fat to accumulate in cells. This fat buildup causes cells to malfunction and eventually die. Over time, cell loss impairs function of tissues and organs including the brain, lungs, spleen, and liver in people with Niemann-Pick disease types A and B.  Mutations in either the NPC1 or NPC2 gene cause Niemann-Pick disease type C. The proteins produced from these genes are involved in the movement of lipids within cells. Mutations in these genes lead to a shortage of functional protein, which prevents movement of cholesterol and other lipids, leading to their accumulation in cells. Because these lipids are not in their proper location in cells, many normal cell functions that require lipids (such as cell membrane formation) are impaired. The accumulation of lipids as well as the cell dysfunction eventually leads to cell death, causing the tissue and organ damage seen in Niemann-Pick disease types C1 and C2.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Niemann-Pick disease:  - Baby's First Test  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Acid Sphingomyelinase Deficiency  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Niemann-Pick Disease Type C  - Genetic Testing Registry: Niemann-Pick disease type C1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Niemann-Pick disease type C2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Niemann-Pick disease, type A  - Genetic Testing Registry: Niemann-Pick disease, type B  - Genetic Testing Registry: Niemann-Pick disease, type C  - Genetic Testing Registry: Niemann-Pick disease, type D  - Genetic Testing Registry: Niemann-pick disease, intermediate, protracted neurovisceral  - Genetic Testing Registry: Sphingomyelin/cholesterol lipidosis  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Niemann-Pick Disease   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care