Norrie disease is an inherited eye disorder that leads to blindness in male infants at birth or soon after birth. Additional symptoms may occur in some cases, although this varies even among individuals in the same family. Most affected individuals develop sensorineural hearing loss and many exhibit cognitive abnormalities such as developmental delays, behavioral issues, or psychotic-like features. Norrie disease is caused by mutations in the NDP gene. It is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. Treatment is directed toward the specific symptoms present in each individual. The coordinated efforts of a team of specialists, including pediatricians, ophthalmologists, and audiologists may be needed. Early intervention and special education services are important to ensure that children with Norrie disease reach their full potential.
 Norrie disease is caused by a change (mutation) in the NDP gene, which is located on the X chromosome. It is inherited in an X-linked recessive manner. The NDP gene provides instructions for making a protein called norrin, which affects the way cells and tissues develop. In particular, the norrin protein seems to play an important role in the development of retinal cells in the eye. It is also involved in creating a blood supply to tissues of the retina and the inner ear, and the development of other body systems. Mutations in the NDP gene can prevent the norrin protein from working correctly, resulting in the signs and symptoms of Norrie disease.
 Because most males with Norrie disease (ND) have complete retinal detachment at the time of birth, surgical intervention after that time is typically not effective for preserving sight. Furthermore, we were unable to find reports about restoring sight to affected individuals after sight has been lost. Individuals without complete retinal detachment may benefit from intervention; however, vitrectomy and laser photocoagulation are reportedly challenging and often associated with poor outcome. A more recent case report reported evidence that immediate, prophylactic laser treatment at birth may prevent retinal detachment and blindness. The individual described in the study was known to be at risk and was diagnosed before birth via amniocentesis, and thus laser treatment shortly after birth was able to be performed. The authors of this report state that although the results they achieved are encouraging, longer observation of a larger number of patients is needed to determine the effectivness of this new approach. In some cases, surgery may be required when progression of the condition leads to increased pressure within the eye. Rarely, enucleation (removal) of the eye may be necessary to control pain. For individuals with hearing loss, hearing aid augmentation is usually successful until middle or late adulthood. Cochlear implants may be considered when function is severely impaired.
Norrie disease is a rare disorder; its exact incidence is unknown. It is not associated with any specific racial or ethnic group.
Mutations in the NDP gene cause Norrie disease.  The NDP gene provides instructions for making a protein called norrin. Norrin participates in the Wnt cascade, a sequence of steps that affect the way cells and tissues develop. In particular, norrin seems to play a critical role in the specialization of retinal cells for their unique sensory capabilities. It is also involved in the establishment of a blood supply to tissues of the retina and the inner ear, and the development of other body systems.  In order to initiate the Wnt cascade, norrin must bind (attach) to another protein called frizzled-4. Mutations in the norrin protein interfere with its ability to bind to frizzled-4, resulting in the signs and symptoms of Norrie disease.
This condition is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. A condition is considered X-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation must be present in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.  In X-linked recessive inheritance, a female with one altered copy of the gene in each cell is called a carrier. She can pass on the gene, but generally does not experience signs and symptoms of the disorder. In rare cases, however, carrier females have shown some retinal abnormalities or mild hearing loss associated with Norrie disease.