Summary : When you're pregnant, eating healthy foods is more important than ever. You need more protein, iron, calcium, and folic acid than you did before pregnancy. You also need more calories. But "eating for two" doesn't mean eating twice as much. It means that the foods you eat are the main source of nutrients for your baby. Sensible, balanced meals will be best for you and your baby.    You should gain weight gradually during your pregnancy, with most of the weight gained in the last trimester. Generally, doctors suggest women gain weight at the following rate:       - 2 to 4 pounds total during the first trimester    - 3 to 4 pounds per month for the second and third trimesters       Most women need 300 calories a day more during at least the last six months of pregnancy than they did before they were pregnant. But not all calories are equal. Your baby needs healthy foods that are packed with nutrients - not "empty calories" such as those found in soft drinks, candies, and desserts.    Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health
Summary : Food provides the energy and nutrients you need to be healthy. Nutrients include proteins, carbohydrates, fats, vitamins, minerals, and water.     Healthy eating is not hard. The key is to       -  Eat a variety of foods, including vegetables, fruits, and whole-grain products    -  Eat lean meats, poultry, fish, beans, and low-fat dairy products     -  Drink lots of water    -  Limit salt, sugar, alcohol, saturated fat, and trans fat in your diet       Saturated fats are usually fats that come from animals. Look for trans fat on the labels of processed foods, margarines, and shortenings.    Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Summary : A healthy diet helps children grow and learn. It also helps prevent obesity and weight-related diseases, such as diabetes. To give your child a nutritious diet       - Make half of what is on your child's plate fruits and vegetables    - Choose healthy sources of protein, such as lean meat, nuts, and eggs    - Serve whole-grain breads and cereals because they are high in fiber. Reduce refined grains.    - Broil, grill, or steam foods instead of frying them    - Limit fast food and junk food    - Offer water or milk instead of sugary fruit drinks and sodas       Learn about your children's nutrient requirements. Some of them, such as the requirements for iron and calcium, change as your child ages.     NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases