Obesity means having too much body fat. It is different from being overweight, which means weighing too much. The weight may come from muscle, bone, fat, and/or body water. Both terms mean that a person's weight is greater than what's considered healthy for his or her height.     Obesity occurs over time when you eat more calories than you use. The balance between calories-in and calories-out differs for each person. Factors that might affect your weight include your genetic makeup, overeating, eating high-fat foods, and not being physically active.     Being obese increases your risk of diabetes, heart disease, stroke, arthritis, and some cancers. If you are obese, losing even 5 to 10 percent of your weight can delay or prevent some of these diseases. For example, that means losing 10 to 20 pounds if you weigh 200 pounds.    NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
Obesity means having too much body fat. It is different from being overweight, which means weighing too much. Both terms mean that a person's weight is greater than what's considered healthy for his or her height. Children grow at different rates, so it isn't always easy to know when a child is obese or overweight. Ask your health care provider to check whether your child's weight and height are in a healthy range.    If a weight-loss program is necessary, involve the whole family in healthy habits so your child doesn't feel singled out. Encourage healthy eating by       - Serving more fruits and vegetables    - Buying fewer soft drinks and high-fat, high-calorie snack foods    - Making sure your child eats breakfast every day    - Eating fast food less often    - Not using food as a reward       Physical activity is also very important. Kids need about 60 minutes each day. It does not have to happen all at once. Several short periods of activity during the day are just as good.    NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
Obesity hypoventilation syndrome (OHS) is a breathing disorder that affects some obese people. Why these people develop OHS isn't fully known. Researchers think that several factors may work together to cause OHS. These factors include:
                
A respiratory (RES-pih-rah-tor-e) system that has to work harder than normal and perhaps differently because of excess body weight. (The respiratory system is a group of organs and tissues, including the lungs, that helps you breathe.)
                
A slow response by the body to fix the problem of too much carbon dioxide and too little oxygen in the blood.
                
The presence of sleep apnea, usually obstructive sleep apnea.
People who are obese are at risk for obesity hypoventilation syndrome (OHS). "Obesity" refers to having too much body fat. People who are obese have body weight that's greater than what is considered healthy for a certain height.
                
The most useful measure of obesity is body mass index (BMI). BMI is calculated from your height and weight. In adults, a BMI of 30 or more is considered obese.
                
You can use the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute's (NHLBI's) online BMI calculator to figure out your BMI, or your doctor can help you.
                
If you are obese, you're at greater risk for OHS if your BMI is 40 or higher. You're also at greater risk if most of your excess weight is around your waist, rather than at your hips. This is referred to as "abdominal obesity."
                
OHS tends to occur more often in men than women. At the time of diagnosis, most people are 40 to 60 years old.
Many of the signs and symptoms of obesity hypoventilation syndrome (OHS) are the same as those of obstructive sleep apnea. This is because many people who have OHS also have obstructive sleep apnea.
                
One of the most common signs of obstructive sleep apnea is loud and chronic (ongoing) snoring. Pauses may occur in the snoring. Choking or gasping may follow the pauses.
                
Other symptoms include:
                
Daytime sleepiness
                
Morning headaches
                
Memory, learning, or concentration problems
                
Feeling irritable or depressed, or having mood swings or personality changes
                
You also may have rapid, shallow breathing. During a physical exam, your doctor might hear abnormal heart sounds while listening to your heart with a stethoscope. He or she also might notice that the opening to your throat is small and your neck is larger than normal.
                
Complications of Obesity Hypoventilation Syndrome
                
When left untreated, OHS can cause serious problems, such as:
                
Leg edema, which is swelling in the legs caused by fluid in the body's tissues.
                
Pulmonary hypertension, which is increased pressure in the pulmonary arteries. These arteries carry blood from your heart to your lungs to pick up oxygen.
                
Cor pulmonale, which is failure of the right side of the heart.
                
Secondary erythrocytosis, which is a condition in which the body makes too many red blood cells.