Bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia (BOOP) is a lung disease that causes inflammation in the small air tubes (bronchioles) and air sacs (alveoli). BOOP typically develops in individuals between 40-60 years old; however the disorder may affect individuals of any age. The signs and symptoms of BOOP vary but often include shortness of breath, a dry cough, and fever. BOOP can be caused by viral infections, various drugs, and other medical conditions. If the cause is known, the condition is called secondary BOOP. In many cases, the underlying cause of BOOP is unknown. These cases are called idiopathic BOOP or cryptogenic organizing pneumonia. Treatment often includes corticosteroid medications.
 Signs and symptoms of BOOP vary. Some individuals with BOOP may have no apparent symptoms, while others may have severe respiratory distress as in acute, rapidly-progressive BOOP. The most common signs and symptoms of BOOP include shortness of breath (dyspnea), dry cough, and fever. Some people with BOOP develope a flu-like illness with cough, fever, fatigue, and weight loss.
may be caused by a variety of factors, including viral infections, inhalation of toxic gases, drugs, connective tissue disorders, radiation therapy, cocaine, inflammatory bowl disease, and HIV infection. In many cases, the underlying cause of BOOP is unknown. These cases are called idiopathic BOOP or cryptogenic organizing pneumonia (COP).
 BOOP is typically diagnosed by lung biopsy, although imaging tests and pulmonary function tests can also provide information for diagnosis.
 Most cases of BOOP respond well to treatment with corticosteroids. If the condition is caused by a particular drug, stopping the drug can also improve a patient's condition. Other medications reported in the medical literature to be beneficial for individuals on a case-by-case basis include: cyclophosphamide, erythromycin in the form of azithromycin, and Mycophenolate Mofetil (CellCept). More esearch is needed to determine the long-term safety and effectiveness of these potential treatment options for individuals with BOOP. In rare cases, lung transplantation may be necessary for individuals with BOOP who do not respond to standard treatment options.
Bronchiolitis obliterans is an inflammatory obstruction of the lung's tiniest airways, the bronchioles. The bronchioles may become damaged and inflamed after inhalation of toxic fumes, as a result of respiratory infections, in association with connective tissue disorders, or after bone marrow or heart-lung transplants. This leads to extensive scarring that blocks the airways, leading to a dry cough, shortness of breath, fatigue and wheezing in the absence of a cold or asthma. While there is no way to reverse the disease, treatments are available to stabilize or slow the progression.   Another similarly named disease, bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia, is a completely different disease.
 Bronchiolitis obliterans is characterized by a dry cough and shortness of breath which develop 2 to 8 weeks after toxic fume exposure or a respiratory illness. Fatigue and wheezing in the absence of a cold or asthma may also be noted. While high resolution chest CT scans and pulmonary function tests may help to detect bronchiolitis obliterans, a surgical lung biopsy is the most definitive way to diagnose the disease.
 While there is no cure for this condition, treatment with corticosteroids can help to stabilize or slow its progression. Immunosuppressive therapies and lung transplants might also be used. Treatment is most effective during the early stages of the disease. If left untreated, bronchiolitis obliterans can be fatal.