The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Oculocutaneous albinism type 3. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Nystagmus 90% Ocular albinism 90% Freckling 50% Strabismus 50% Cutaneous photosensitivity 7.5% Albinism - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Partial albinism - Red hair - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Oculocutaneous albinism type 2 is a genetic condition that affects the coloring (pigmentation) of the skin, hair, and eyes. Affected individuals typically have very fair skin and white or light-colored hair. Long-term sun exposure greatly increases the risk of skin damage and skin cancers, including an aggressive form of skin cancer called melanoma, in people with this condition. This condition also reduces pigmentation of the colored part of the eye (the iris) and the light-sensitive tissue at the back of the eye (the retina). People with this condition usually have vision problems such as reduced sharpness; nystagmus and strabismus; and increased sensitivity to light (photophobia). This condition is caused by mutations in the OCA2 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Oculocutaneous albinism type 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Ocular albinism 90% Freckling 50% Nystagmus 50% Optic atrophy 50% Photophobia 50% Visual impairment 50% Melanoma 7.5% Neoplasm of the skin 7.5% Strabismus 7.5% Albinism - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Blue irides - Freckles in sun-exposed areas - Hypopigmentation of the fundus - Hypoplasia of the fovea - Red hair - Reduced visual acuity - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Oculocutaneous albinism type 1B. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Freckling 90% Generalized hypopigmentation 90% Hypopigmentation of hair 90% Ocular albinism 90% Strabismus 90% Abnormality of the macula 50% Melanocytic nevus 50% Nystagmus 50% Optic atrophy 50% Photophobia 50% Visual impairment 50% Neoplasm of the skin 7.5% Thickened skin 7.5% Albinism - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Hypopigmentation of the fundus - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Oculocutaneous albinism is a group of conditions that affect the coloring of the hair and eyes.  Individuals affected by oculocutaneous albinism have very light skin and light-colored irises; they may also have vision problems such as decreased sharpness of vision, rapid eye movements (nystagmus), crossed eyes (strabismus), or increased sensitivity to light (photophobia).  All types of oculocutaneous albinism are caused by gene mutations that are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.  Treatment includes covering the skin from sun exposure by using sunscreen and protective clothing and attending to vision problems by wearing glasses.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Oculocutaneous albinism. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Cutaneous photosensitivity 90% Generalized hypopigmentation 90% Hypopigmentation of hair 90% Nystagmus 90% Ocular albinism 90% Visual impairment 90% Abnormality of the macula 50% Astigmatism 50% Hypermetropia 50% Myopia 50% Photophobia 50% Strabismus 50% Neoplasm of the skin 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Individuals with oculocutaneous albinism should have annual skin examinations to check for skin damage or skin cancer and annual eye examination to check vision.  Affected individuals should cover their skin from sun exposure by using sunscreen and wearing protective clothing such as long-sleeve shirts, long pants, and hats with wide brims.  Glasses may be worn to reduce sensitivity to bright light or to improve vision.  Additional therapies or surgery may be used to treat crossed eyes (strabismus) or rapid eye movements (nystagmus).
Oculocutaneous albinism is a group of conditions that affect coloring (pigmentation) of the skin, hair, and eyes. Affected individuals typically have very fair skin and white or light-colored hair. Long-term sun exposure greatly increases the risk of skin damage and skin cancers, including an aggressive form of skin cancer called melanoma, in people with this condition. Oculocutaneous albinism also reduces pigmentation of the colored part of the eye (the iris) and the light-sensitive tissue at the back of the eye (the retina). People with this condition usually have vision problems such as reduced sharpness; rapid, involuntary eye movements (nystagmus); and increased sensitivity to light (photophobia).  Researchers have identified multiple types of oculocutaneous albinism, which are distinguished by their specific skin, hair, and eye color changes and by their genetic cause. Oculocutaneous albinism type 1 is characterized by white hair, very pale skin, and light-colored irises. Type 2 is typically less severe than type 1; the skin is usually a creamy white color and hair may be light yellow, blond, or light brown. Type 3 includes a form of albinism called rufous oculocutaneous albinism, which usually affects dark-skinned people. Affected individuals have reddish-brown skin, ginger or red hair, and hazel or brown irises. Type 3 is often associated with milder vision abnormalities than the other forms of oculocutaneous albinism. Type 4 has signs and symptoms similar to those seen with type 2.  Several additional types of this disorder have been proposed, each affecting one or a few families.
Overall, an estimated 1 in 20,000 people worldwide are born with oculocutaneous albinism. The condition affects people in many ethnic groups and geographical regions. Types 1 and 2 are the most common forms of this condition; types 3 and 4 are less common. Type 2 occurs more frequently in African Americans, some Native American groups, and people from sub-Saharan Africa. Type 3, specifically rufous oculocutaneous albinism, has been described primarily in people from southern Africa. Studies suggest that type 4 occurs more frequently in the Japanese and Korean populations than in people from other parts of the world.
Oculocutaneous albinism can result from mutations in several genes, including TYR, OCA2, TYRP1, and SLC45A2. Changes in the TYR gene cause type 1; mutations in the OCA2 gene are responsible for type 2; TYRP1 mutations cause type 3; and changes in the SLC45A2 gene result in type 4. Mutations in additional genes likely underlie the other forms of this disorder. The genes associated with oculocutaneous albinism are involved in producing a pigment called melanin, which is the substance that gives skin, hair, and eyes their color. In the retina, melanin also plays a role in normal vision. Mutations in any of these genes disrupt the ability of cells to make melanin, which reduces pigmentation in the skin, hair, and eyes. A lack of melanin in the retina leads to the vision problems characteristic of oculocutaneous albinism.  Alterations in the MC1R gene can change the appearance of people with oculocutaneous albinism type 2. This gene helps regulate melanin production and is responsible for some normal variation in pigmentation. People with genetic changes in both the OCA2 and MC1R genes have many of the usual features of oculocutaneous albinism type 2, including light-colored eyes and vision problems; however, they typically have red hair instead of the usual yellow, blond, or light brown hair seen with this condition.  Some individuals with oculocutaneous albinism do not have mutations in any of the known genes. In these people, the genetic cause of the condition is unknown.
Oculocutaneous albinism is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of a gene in each cell have mutations. Most often, the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of oculocutaneous albinism:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Oculocutaneous Albinism Type 1  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Oculocutaneous Albinism Type 2  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Oculocutaneous Albinism Type 4  - Genetic Testing Registry: Oculocutaneous albinism  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Albinism   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care