The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Ornithine translocase deficiency syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Intellectual disability 30% Chorioretinal atrophy 1% Abnormal pyramidal signs - Acute encephalopathy - Acute hepatitis - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cerebral cortical atrophy - Clonus - Coma - Decreased liver function - Decreased nerve conduction velocity - Episodic vomiting - Failure to thrive - Generalized myoclonic seizures - Hepatomegaly - Hyperammonemia - Hyperornithinemia - Hypopigmentation of the fundus - Lethargy - Morphological abnormality of the pyramidal tract - Muscular hypotonia - Phenotypic variability - Poor coordination - Protein avoidance - Spastic paraparesis - Specific learning disability - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency is an inherited disorder that causes ammonia to accumulate in the blood. Ammonia, which is formed when proteins are broken down in the body, is toxic if the levels become too high. The nervous system is especially sensitive to the effects of excess ammonia. The signs and symptoms of OTC deficiency may include development delay, intellectual disability and liver problems. It is caused by changes (mutations) in the OTC gene. OTC deficiency is inherited as an X-linked condition. Treatment consists of not eating protein, taking certain medications and having hemodialysis, if needed.
 Ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency often becomes evident in the first few days of life. An infant with OTC deficiency may be lacking in energy (lethargic) or unwilling to eat, and have a poorly-controlled breathing rate or body temperature. Some babies with this disorder may experience seizures or unusual body movements, or go into a coma. Complications from OTC deficiency may include developmental delay and intellectual disability. Progressive liver damage, skin lesions, and brittle hair may also be seen. In some affected individuals, signs and symptoms of OTC deficiency may be less severe, and may not appear until later in life. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Aminoaciduria 90% Hepatic failure 90% Hyperammonemia 90% Hypoglycemia 90% Pyloric stenosis 90% Splenomegaly 90% Stroke 5% Cerebral edema - Coma - Episodic ammonia intoxication - Episodic ataxia - Failure to thrive - Hyperglutaminemia - Intellectual disability - Irritability - Lethargy - Low plasma citrulline - Protein avoidance - Respiratory alkalosis - Seizures - Vomiting - X-linked recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency is caused by mutations in the OTC gene. OTC deficiency belongs to a class of genetic diseases called urea cycle disorders. The urea cycle is a sequence of reactions that occurs in liver cells. It processes excess nitrogen, generated when protein is used by the body, to make a compound called urea that is excreted by the kidneys. In OTC deficiency, the enzyme that starts a specific reaction within the urea cycle is damaged or missing. The urea cycle cannot proceed normally, and nitrogen accumulates in the bloodstream in the form of ammonia. Ammonia is especially damaging to the nervous system, so OTC deficiency causes neurological problems as well as eventual damage to the liver.
 Ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency is an X-linked disorder. A condition is considered X-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), mutations in both copies of the gene will cause the disorder. Some females with only one altered copy of the OTC gene also show signs and symptoms of OTC deficiency.
Ornithine translocase deficiency is an inherited disorder that causes ammonia to accumulate in the blood. Ammonia, which is formed when proteins are broken down in the body, is toxic if the levels become too high. The nervous system is especially sensitive to the effects of excess ammonia.  Ornithine translocase deficiency varies widely in its severity and age of onset. An infant with ornithine translocase deficiency may be lacking in energy (lethargic) or refuse to eat, or have poorly controlled breathing or body temperature. Some babies with this disorder may experience seizures or unusual body movements, or go into a coma. Episodes of illness may coincide with the introduction of high-protein formulas or solid foods into the diet.  In most affected individuals, signs and symptoms of ornithine translocase deficiency do not appear until later in life. Later-onset forms of ornithine translocase deficiency are usually less severe than the infantile form. Some people with later-onset ornithine translocase deficiency cannot tolerate high-protein foods, such as meat. Occasionally, high-protein meals or stress caused by illness or periods without food (fasting) may cause ammonia to accumulate more quickly in the blood. This rapid increase of ammonia may lead to episodes of vomiting, lack of energy (lethargy), problems with coordination (ataxia), confusion, or blurred vision. Complications of ornithine translocase deficiency may include developmental delay, learning disabilities, and stiffness caused by abnormal tensing of the muscles (spasticity).
Ornithine translocase deficiency is a very rare disorder. Fewer than 100 affected individuals have been reported worldwide.
Mutations in the SLC25A15 gene cause ornithine translocase deficiency.  Ornithine translocase deficiency belongs to a class of genetic diseases called urea cycle disorders. The urea cycle is a sequence of reactions that occurs in liver cells. This cycle processes excess nitrogen, generated when protein is used by the body, to make a compound called urea that is excreted by the kidneys.  The SLC25A15 gene provides instructions for making a protein called a mitochondrial ornithine transporter. This protein is needed to move a molecule called ornithine within the mitochondria (the energy-producing centers in cells). Specifically, this protein transports ornithine across the inner membrane of mitochondria to the region called the mitochondrial matrix, where it participates in the urea cycle.  Mutations in the SLC25A15 gene result in a mitochondrial ornithine transporter that is unstable or the wrong shape, and which cannot bring ornithine to the mitochondrial matrix. This failure of ornithine transport causes an interruption of the urea cycle and the accumulation of ammonia, resulting in the signs and symptoms of ornithine translocase deficiency.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of ornithine translocase deficiency:  - Baby's First Test  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Hyperornithinemia-Hyperammonemia-Homocitrullinuria Syndrome  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Urea Cycle Disorders Overview  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hereditary urea cycle abnormality   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency is an inherited disorder that causes ammonia to accumulate in the blood. Ammonia, which is formed when proteins are broken down in the body, is toxic if the levels become too high. The nervous system is especially sensitive to the effects of excess ammonia.  Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency often becomes evident in the first few days of life. An infant with ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency may be lacking in energy (lethargic) or unwilling to eat, and have poorly-controlled breathing rate or body temperature. Some babies with this disorder may experience seizures or unusual body movements, or go into a coma. Complications from ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency may include developmental delay and intellectual disability. Progressive liver damage, skin lesions, and brittle hair may also be seen.  In some affected individuals, signs and symptoms of ornithine transcarbamylase may be less severe, and may not appear until later in life.
Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency is believed to occur in approximately 1 in every 80,000 people.
Mutations in the OTC gene cause ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency.  Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency belongs to a class of genetic diseases called urea cycle disorders. The urea cycle is a sequence of reactions that occurs in liver cells. It processes excess nitrogen, generated when protein is used by the body, to make a compound called urea that is excreted by the kidneys.  In ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, the enzyme that starts a specific reaction within the urea cycle is damaged or missing. The urea cycle cannot proceed normally, and nitrogen accumulates in the bloodstream in the form of ammonia.  Ammonia is especially damaging to the nervous system, so ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency causes neurological problems as well as eventual damage to the liver.
Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency is an X-linked disorder. A condition is considered X-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.  In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), mutations in both copies of the gene will cause the disorder. Some females with only one altered copy of the OTC gene also show signs and symptoms of ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency:  - Baby's First Test  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Ornithine Transcarbamylase Deficiency  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Urea Cycle Disorders Overview  - Genetic Testing Registry: Ornithine carbamoyltransferase deficiency  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hereditary urea cycle abnormality   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care