 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Orofaciodigital syndrome 5. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Median cleft lip 90% Postaxial hand polydactyly 90% Abnormality of the oral cavity 7.5% Brachydactyly syndrome 7.5% Epicanthus 7.5% Facial asymmetry 7.5% Finger syndactyly 7.5% Preaxial hand polydactyly 7.5% Aganglionic megacolon 5% Agenesis of corpus callosum 5% Bifid uvula 5% Cleft palate 5% Scoliosis 5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Frontal bossing - Hypertelorism - Intellectual disability - Lobulated tongue - Postaxial foot polydactyly - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Orofaciodigital syndrome (OFDS) type 2 is a genetic condition that was first described in 1941 by Mohr. OFDS type 2 belongs to a group of disorders called orofaciodigital syndromes (OFDS) characterized by mouth malformations, unique facial findings, and abnormalities of the fingers and/or toes. Other organs might be affected in OFDS, defining the specific types. OFDS type 2 is very similar to oral-facial-digital syndrome (OFDS) type 1. However, the following are not found in OFDS type 1: (1) absence of hair and skin abnormalities; (2) presence of more than one fused big toe on each foot; (3) involvement of the central nervous system; and (4) heart malformations. Although it is known that OFDS type 2 is genetic, the exact gene that causes the syndrome has not been identified. The condition is believed to be inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Treatment is based on the symptoms present in the patient.
 Orofaciodigital syndrome type 2 is caused by mutations (changes) of an as yet unidentified gene.
 Orofaciodigital syndrome type 2 is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means that an individual needs to inherit two mutated (changed) copies of the gene-one from each parent-in order to have the condition.
 Treatment is dependent on the symptoms. For example, reconstructive surgery might be performed to correct oral, facial, and/or finger and toe abnormalities.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Orofaciodigital syndrome 8. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of calvarial morphology 90% Abnormality of the eyelashes 90% Abnormality of the palate 90% Abnormality of the voice 90% Anteverted nares 90% Bifid tongue 90% Blepharophimosis 90% Brachydactyly syndrome 90% Camptodactyly of finger 90% Chorioretinal coloboma 90% Clinodactyly of the 5th finger 90% Cognitive impairment 90% EEG abnormality 90% Finger syndactyly 90% Hearing abnormality 90% Increased number of teeth 90% Lip pit 90% Microcephaly 90% Non-midline cleft lip 90% Nystagmus 90% Polyhydramnios 90% Postaxial hand polydactyly 90% Prominent nasal bridge 90% Short philtrum 90% Short stature 90% Synophrys 90% Tapered finger 90% Telecanthus 90% Upslanted palpebral fissure 90% Ventriculomegaly 90% Wide nasal bridge 90% Bifid nasal tip - Broad nasal tip - Cleft palate - High palate - Hypertelorism - Hypoplasia of the epiglottis - Median cleft lip - Milia - Polydactyly - Recurrent aspiration pneumonia - Short tibia - Strabismus - Syndactyly - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Orofaciodigital syndrome 3. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the pupil 90% Cleft palate 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Increased number of teeth 90% Kyphosis 90% Pectus excavatum 90% Postaxial hand polydactyly 90% Abnormal nasal morphology 50% Abnormality of eye movement 50% Abnormality of the fingernails 50% Abnormality of the nipple 50% Abnormality of the tragus 50% EEG abnormality 50% Frontal bossing 50% Hypertelorism 50% Hypertonia 50% Low-set, posteriorly rotated ears 50% Muscular hypotonia 50% Prominent occiput 50% Round face 50% Abnormality of the macula 7.5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Bifid uvula - Bulbous nose - Hyperconvex nail - Intellectual disability - Low-set ears - Microdontia - Myoclonus - Postaxial foot polydactyly - Short sternum - Tongue nodules - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Orofaciodigital syndrome 11. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the odontoid process - Cleft palate - Intellectual disability - Kyphoscoliosis - Sporadic - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Orofaciodigital syndrome 1 (OFD1), also called orofaciodigital syndrome type 1, is a condition that affects the development of the oral cavity (the mouth and teeth), facial features, and digits (fingers and toes). This condition also causes polycystic kidney disease. Orofaciodigital syndrome 1 is caused by a change (mutation) in a gene called OFD1 which appears to play an important role in the early development of many parts of the body including the brain, face, limbs, and kidneys. The syndrome is inherited in an X-linked dominant pattern. The diagnosis of OFD1 is sometimes made at birth, but it may be suspected only after polycystic kidney disease is found in later childhood or adulthood. Treatment for OFD1 typically focuses on the symptoms an individual has and may include surgery for cleft lip or palate , other oral abnormalities, or syndactyly (webbing of the fingers or toes). Researchers have identified at least 13 potential forms of orofaciodigital syndromes, which are classified by their patterns of signs and symptoms. OFD1 is the most common form of orofaciodigital syndrome and differs from the other types mainly by its association with polycystic kidney disease.
 Genetic testing for orofaciodigital syndrome 1 is clinically available. OFD1  is the only gene currently known to be associated with this condition. Testing is often used to confirm or establish the diagnosis in an individual when OFD1 is suspected.  A change (mutation) in the OFD1 gene is detected in up to 85% of individuals who have OFD1.  You can find laboratories offering clinical genetic testing for OFD1 on a website called GeneTests. To see a listing of clinical testing laboratories click here. GeneTests does not currently list laboratories doing research testing for OFD1.