Risk Increases With Age Researchers suspect that osteoarthritis is caused by a combination of factors in the body and the environment. The chance of developing osteoarthritis increases with age. It is estimated that 33.6% (12.4 million) of individuals age 65 and older are affected by the disease. Wear and Tear on Joints Affects Cartilage Osteoarthritis often results from years of wear and tear on joints. This wear and tear mostly affects the cartilage, the tissue that cushions the ends of bones within the joint. Osteoarthritis occurs when the cartilage begins to fray, wear away, and decay. Putting too much stress on a joint that has been previously injured, improper alignment of joints, and excess weight all may contribute to the development of osteoarthritis.
Osteoarthritis is the most common form of arthritis among older people. It affects hands, low back, neck, and weight-bearing joints such as knees, hips, and feet. Osteoarthritis occurs when cartilage, the tissue that cushions the ends of the bones within the joints, breaks down and wears away. This causes bones to rub together, causing pain, swelling, and loss of motion of the joint.
The chance of developing osteoarthritis increases with age. It is estimated that 33.6% (12.4 million) of individuals age 65 and older are affected by the disease.
Warning signs of osteoarthritis include -  joint pain  -  swelling or tenderness in one or more joints  -  stiffness after getting out of bed or sitting for a long time  -  a crunching feeling or sound of bone rubbing on bone.  joint pain swelling or tenderness in one or more joints stiffness after getting out of bed or sitting for a long time a crunching feeling or sound of bone rubbing on bone. Not everyone with osteoarthritis develops symptoms. In fact, only a third of people with x-ray evidence of osteoarthritis report pain or other symptoms.
No single test can diagnose osteoarthritis. When a person feels pain in his or her joints, it may or may not be osteoarthritis. The doctor will use a combination of tests to try to determine if osteoarthritis is causing the symptoms. These may include a medical history, a physical examination, x-rays, and laboratory tests. A patient's attitudes, daily activities, and levels of anxiety or depression have a lot to do with how much the symptoms of osteoarthritis affect day-to-day living.
Warm towels, hot packs, or a warm bath or shower can provide temporary pain relief. Medications such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, or NSAIDs, help reduce pain and inflammation that result from osteoarthritis. A doctor or physical therapist can recommend if heat or cold is the best treatment. For osteoarthritis in the knee, wearing insoles or cushioned shoes may reduce joint stress.