Fractures -- A Possible Warning Sign Osteoporosis does not have any symptoms until a fracture occurs. Women and men with osteoporosis most often break bones in the hip, spine, and wrist. But any fracture in an older person could be a warning sign that the bone is weaker than optimal. Some people may be unaware that they have already experienced one or more spine fractures. Height loss of one inch or more may be the first sign that someone has experienced spine fractures due to osteoporosis. Multiple spine fractures can cause a curved spine, stooped posture, back pain, and back fatigue. Women and men who have had a fracture are at high risk of experiencing another one. A fracture over the age of 50 or several fractures before that age may be a warning sign that a person has already developed osteoporosis. People over the age of 50 who have experienced a fracture should talk to their doctor about getting evaluated for osteoporosis. Risk Factors for Fractures The more likely you are to fall, the higher your risk for a fracture. And more severe falls increase your risk for fractures. Factors that increase your risk of falling and of fracturing a bone include - decreased muscle strength   - poor balance  -  impaired eyesight  - impaired mental abilities   - certain medications, such as tranquilizers and muscle relaxants  - hazardous elements in your living environment, such as slippery throw rugs and icy sidewalks.  decreased muscle strength poor balance impaired eyesight impaired mental abilities certain medications, such as tranquilizers and muscle relaxants hazardous elements in your living environment, such as slippery throw rugs and icy sidewalks. The angle at which you fall also affects your risk of fracture. Hip Fractures Although low bone mass (or low bone density) plays an important role in determining a person's risk of osteoporosis, it is only one of many risk factors for fractures. Various aspects of bone geometry, such as tallness, hip structure, and thighbone (femur) length, can also affect your chances of breaking a bone if you fall. Increasing age, too much weight loss, a history of fractures since age 50, having an existing spine fracture, and having a mother who fractured her hip all increase the risk of hip fracture regardless of a person's bone density. People with more risk factors have a higher chance of suffering a hip fracture.
Osteoporosis is a disease that thins and weakens the bones to the point that they break easily. Women and men with osteoporosis most often break bones in the hip, spine, and wrist, but osteoporosis can be the cause of bone fractures anywhere.
Some risk factors for osteoporosis cannot be changed. These include - Gender. Women are at higher risk for osteoporosis than men. They have smaller bones and lose bone more rapidly than men do because of hormone changes that occur after menopause. Therefore, if you are a woman, you are at higher risk for osteoporosis.  - Age. Because bones become thinner with age, the older you are, the greater your risk of osteoporosis.  - Ethnicity. Caucasian and Asian women are at the highest risk for osteoporosis. This is mainly due to differences in bone mass and density compared with other ethnic groups. African-American and Hispanic women are also at risk, but less so.  - Family History. Osteoporosis tends to run in families. If a family member has osteoporosis or breaks a bone, there is a greater chance that you will too.  - History of Previous Fracture. People who have had a fracture after the age of 50 are at high risk of having another. Gender. Women are at higher risk for osteoporosis than men. They have smaller bones and lose bone more rapidly than men do because of hormone changes that occur after menopause. Therefore, if you are a woman, you are at higher risk for osteoporosis. Age. Because bones become thinner with age, the older you are, the greater your risk of osteoporosis. Ethnicity. Caucasian and Asian women are at the highest risk for osteoporosis. This is mainly due to differences in bone mass and density compared with other ethnic groups. African-American and Hispanic women are also at risk, but less so. Family History. Osteoporosis tends to run in families. If a family member has osteoporosis or breaks a bone, there is a greater chance that you will too. History of Previous Fracture. People who have had a fracture after the age of 50 are at high risk of having another.
Diagnosing osteoporosis involves several steps, starting with a physical exam and a careful medical history, blood and urine tests, and possibly a bone mineral density assessment. When recording information about your medical history, your doctor will ask questions to find out whether you have risk factors for osteoporosis and fractures. The doctor may ask about -  any fractures you have had   -  your lifestyle (including diet, exercise habits, and whether you smoke)  - current or past health problems   - medications that could contribute to low bone mass and increased fracture risk  - your family history of osteoporosis and other diseases   - for women, your menstrual history.  any fractures you have had your lifestyle (including diet, exercise habits, and whether you smoke) current or past health problems medications that could contribute to low bone mass and increased fracture risk your family history of osteoporosis and other diseases for women, your menstrual history.
A comprehensive osteoporosis treatment program includes a focus on proper nutrition, exercise, and safety issues to prevent falls that may result in fractures. In addition, your doctor may prescribe a medication to slow or stop bone loss, increase bone density, and reduce fracture risk. Nutrition.  The foods we eat contain a variety of vitamins, minerals, and other important nutrients that help keep our bodies healthy. All of these nutrients are needed in balanced proportion. In particular, calcium and vitamin D are needed for strong bones and for your heart, muscles, and nerves to function properly.   Exercise. Exercise is an important component of an osteoporosis prevention and treatment program. Exercise not only improves your bone health, but it increases muscle strength, coordination, and balance, and leads to better overall health. Although exercise is good for someone with osteoporosis, it should not put any sudden or excessive strain on your bones. As extra insurance against fractures, your doctor can recommend specific exercises to strengthen and support your back. Therapeutic medications.  Several medications are available for the prevention and/or treatment of osteoporosis, including: bisphosphonates; estrogen agonists/antagonists (also called selective estrogen receptor modulators or SERMS); calcitonin; parathyroid hormone; estrogen therapy; hormone therapy; and a recently approved RANK ligand (RANKL) inhibitor. (Watch the video to learn how exercise helped a 70-year-old woman with osteoporosis. To enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. To reduce the video, press the Escape (Esc) button on your keyboard.)
Juvenile osteoporosis is a condition of bone demineralization characterized by pain in the back and extremities, multiple fractures, difficulty walking, and evidence of osteoporosis. Symptoms typically develop just before puberty. Osteoporosis is rare in children and adolescents. When it does occur, it is usually caused by an underlying medical disorder or by medications used to treat the disorder. This is called secondary osteoporosis. Sometimes, however, there is no identifiable cause of osteoporosis in a child. This is known as idiopathic osteoporosis. There is no established medical or surgical therapy for juvenile osteoporosis. In some cases, treatment is not necessary, as the condition resolves spontaneously. Early diagnosis may allow for preventive steps, including physical therapy, avoidance of weight-bearing activities, use of crutches and other supportive care. A well-balanced diet rich in calcium and vitamin D is also important. In severe, long-lasting cases, medications such as bisphosphonates may be used. In most cases, complete recovery of bone occurs.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Juvenile osteoporosis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Bone pain 90% Recurrent fractures 90% Reduced bone mineral density 90% Gait disturbance 50% Kyphosis 7.5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Low serum calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol) - Osteoporosis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Juvenile primary osteoporosis is a skeletal disorder characterized by thinning of the bones (osteoporosis) that begins in childhood. Osteoporosis is caused by a shortage of calcium and other minerals in bones (decreased bone mineral density), which makes the bones brittle and prone to fracture. Affected individuals often have multiple fractures in the long bones of the arms and legs, especially in the regions where new bone forms (metaphyses). They also have fractures in the bones that form the spine (vertebrae), which can cause collapse of the affected vertebrae (compressed vertebrae). Multiple fractures can cause bone pain and lead to movement problems.
The prevalence of juvenile primary osteoporosis is unknown. Nearly 1 in 10 adults over age 50 have osteoporosis, but the condition is uncommon in children. Osteoporosis can occur at a young age as a feature of other conditions but rarely occurs without other signs and symptoms (primary osteoporosis).
Mutations in the LRP5 gene can cause juvenile primary osteoporosis. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that participates in a chemical signaling pathway that affects the way cells and tissues develop. In particular, the LRP5 protein is involved in the regulation of bone mineral density.  LRP5 gene mutations that cause juvenile primary osteoporosis result in an LRP5 protein that cannot transmit signals along the pathway. The resulting reduction in signaling impairs proper bone development, causing decreased bone mineral density and osteoporosis at a young age.  Many people with childhood-onset osteoporosis do not have a mutation in the LRP5 gene. (When its cause is unknown, the condition is often called idiopathic juvenile osteoporosis). It is likely that mutations in other genes that have not been identified are involved in this condition.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of juvenile primary osteoporosis:  - Lucile Packard Children's Hospital at Stanford: Juvenile Osteoporosis  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Bone Mineral Density Test  - Merck Manual Home Health Edition: Osteoporosis   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care