Thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS) causes pain in the shoulder, arm, and neck. It happens when the nerves or blood vessels just below your neck are compressed, or squeezed. The compression can happen between the muscles of your neck and shoulder or between the first rib and collarbone. You may feel burning, tingling, and numbness along your arm, hand, and fingers. If a nerve is compressed, you may also feel weakness in your hand. If a vein is compressed, your hand might be sensitive to cold, or turn pale or bluish. Your arm might swell and tire easily.    TOS is more common in women. It usually starts between 20 and 50 years of age. Doctors do nerve and imaging studies to diagnose it.    There are many causes of TOS, including       - Injury    - Anatomical defects    - Tumors that press on nerves    - Poor posture that causes nerve compression    - Pregnancy    - Repetitive arm and shoulder movements and activity, such as from playing certain sports       Treatment depends on what caused your TOS. Medicines, physical therapy, and relaxation might help. Surgery may also be an option. Most people recover.    NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
Thoracic outlet syndrome refers to the many signs and symptoms caused from compression of the group of nerves and blood vessels in the area just above the first rib and behind the clavicle. The term thoracic outlet syndrome is not a specific diagnosis, but refers to a group of conditions, namely neurogenic (nTOS), venous (vTOS), and arterial thoracic outlet syndrome (aTOS). While collectively TOS is not thought to be rare, individual sub-types may be. The most common type (95% of cases) is nTOS which is caused from brachial plexus compression.  Symptoms of nTOS include shoulder and arm numbness, abnormal sensations and weakness. vTOS may cause deep vein thrombosis and swelling; and aTOS can cause blood clots, arm pain with exertion, or acute arterial thrombosis (sudden blood flood obstruction in an artery). Diagnosis of TOS can be very difficult and diagnosis is often delayed. Treatment depends on the type of TOS and may include physical therapy, thoracic outlet decompression, thrombolysis or other procedures.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Thoracic outlet syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Paresthesia 90% Abnormality of the ribs 50% Acrocyanosis 50% Arthralgia 50% Edema 50% Muscle weakness 50% Myalgia 50% EMG abnormality 7.5% Flexion contracture 7.5% Thrombophlebitis 7.5% Venous insufficiency 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Cervical ribs are actually thought to be a common trait. It has been estimated that 1 to 2% of the population have a cervical rib. Cervical ribs can affect one or both sides of the neck, and may cause thoracic outlet syndrome by putting pressure on an artery.  Currently, the cause of cervical ribs is not known. In general, both genetic and environmental factors are thought to be involved. There have been animal studies investigating the role of HOX genes in causing extra ribs. Studies have also suggested environmental exposures, such as maternal exposure to foreign chemicals or stress during pregnancy could play a role. Further research in this area is needed. There have been rare case reports of families with multiple members with cervical rib. In these families autosomal dominant inheritance was suspected. Click here to learn more about autosomal dominant inheritance.   While we were unable to find recurrence risk data that might help inform your loved ones of their risk for cervical rib and thoracic outlet syndrome, we do suggest that your family members let their healthcare provider know of their family medical history. The Surgeon General's Family History Initiative's Family Health Portrait Tool, may be a helpful resource. You can use this tool to collect, record, and share your family health history information. http://www.hhs.gov/familyhistory/
 Diagnosis may include nerve conduction studies, ultrasounds or MRI scans or computed tomographic imaging studies.The diagnosis of neurogenic TOS is especially difficult and may involve many exams, multiple specialist visits, and many different treatments. A number of disorders have symptoms similar to those of TOS, including rotator cuff injuries, fibromyalgia, multiple sclerosis, complex regional pain syndrome, and tumors of the syrinx or spinal cord. These conditions must be ruled out, which may also be difficult.
Treatment begins with exercise programs and physical therapy to strengthen chest muscles, restore normal posture, and relieve compression by increasing the space of the area the nerve passes through. Doctors will often prescribe non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (such as naproxen or ibuprofen) for pain. Other medicines include thromobolytics to break up blood clots and anticoagulants to prevent clots. If this doesn't relieve pain, a doctor may recommend thoracic outlet decompression surgery to release or remove the structures causing compression of the nerve or artery.
The outcome for individuals with TOS varies according to type. The majority of individuals with TOS will improve with exercise and physical therapy. Vascular TOS, and true neurogenic TOS often require surgery to relieve pressure on the affected vessel or nerve.
The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) and other institutes at the National Institutes of Health support research in TOS through grants to major medical research institutions across the country. Much of this research focuses on finding better ways to diagnose and treat TOS.