The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Pachygyria with mental retardation and seizures. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Cognitive impairment 90% Seizures 90% Premature birth 50% Abnormality of the skeletal system - Arachnoid cyst - Atypical absence seizures - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Generalized tonic-clonic seizures - Intellectual disability - Pachygyria - Profound static encephalopathy - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Pachygyria is a developmental condition due to abnormal migration of nerve cells (neurons) in the developing brain and nervous system. With pachygyria, there are few gyri (the ridges between the wrinkles in the brain), and they are usually broad and flat. The condition is also known as "incomplete lissencephaly." Pachygyria may occur alone (isolated) or as part of various underlying syndromes. Symptoms vary among affected people and may include moderate to severe developmental delay, seizures, poor muscle tone and control, feeding or swallowing difficulties, and small head size (microcephaly). In most cases it is not inherited, but various inheritance patterns have been reported. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive.
 Signs and symptoms of pachygyria vary among affected people and can depend on the extent of the abnormality. They often include poor muscle tone and motor function; seizures; developmental delays; intellectual disability; failure to grow and thrive; difficulties with feeding or swallowing; swelling in the extremities; and small head size (microcephaly). Most infants appear physically normal, but some conditions associated with pachygyria cause distinctive facial or skull characteristics.
 Pachygyria, also called "incomplete lissencephaly," may be caused by various non-genetic (environmental) and genetic factors that play a role in impairing the development of the outer region of the brain (the cerebral cortex). The cerebral cortex is responsible for conscious movement and thought, and should have deep convolutions (gyri) and grooves (sulci), which are formed by "infolding" of the cerebral cortex. During normal embryonic growth, immature cells that later develop into specialized nerve cells (neurons) normally migrate to the brain's surface, making several layers of cells. When this process is impaired, the cells don't migrate to their locations, resulting in too few cell layers and absence (agyria) or incomplete development (pachygyria) of gyri. Environmental factors that contribute to the condition may include intrauterine infection during pregnancy (such as a virus), and insufficient flow of oxygenated blood to the brain (ischemia) during fetal development. More than 25 syndromes due to abnormal migration of neurons have been reported; in some of these cases, the genetic cause and pattern of inheritance depends on that of the specific syndrome. Mutations in several genes have been identified in people with abnormalities of cortical development, including the KIF5C, KIF2A, DYNC1H1, WDR62, and TUBG1 genes. Studies have also found that isolated lissencephaly may result from mutations in the LIS1 and XLIS (also called DCX) genes. People interested in learning about the cause of pachygyria in themselves or family members should speak with their health care provider or a a genetics professional.
 Because the symptoms of the condition vary from person to person, treatment is symptomatic, and may include anti-seizure medication, such as Trileptal, and special or supplemental education consisting of physical, occupational, and speech therapies.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Pachygyria, frontotemporal. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Esotropia - Hypertelorism - Intellectual disability, moderate - Pachygyria - Seizures - Telecanthus - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.