Enlarged and Misshapen Bones Paget's disease of bone causes affected bones to become enlarged and misshapen. Our bones are living tissue, and our bodies are constantly breaking down old bone and replacing it with new bone. In Paget's disease, however, old bone is broken down and replaced at a faster rate than normal. The new bone is larger and weaker than normal bone. Paget's disease can occur in any bone in the body, but it is most common in the pelvis, spine, skull, and leg bones. It may occur in just one bone or in several bones, but it does not affect the entire skeleton or spread from affected bones to normal bones. Common symptoms include pain, misshapen bones, and a greater chance of broken bones. Complications Paget's disease can also lead to complications, such as arthritis, headaches, hearing loss, or nervous system problems, depending on which bones are affected. If not treated, Paget's disease can reduce a person's ability to perform activities of daily living, thereby reducing quality of life. Although it is the second most common bone disease after osteoporosis, Paget's disease is still uncommon. According to Bone Health and Osteoporosis: A Report of the Surgeon General, an estimated 1 million people in the U.S. have Paget's disease, or about 1.3 people per 100 men and women age 45-74. The disease is more common in older people and those of Northern European heritage. Men are more likely than women to have the disease. Cause is Unknown Paget's disease is named after the British surgeon, Sir James Paget, who first identified the disease in 1877. Researchers are not sure what causes it. Heredity may be a factor in some cases. Research suggests that a close relative of someone with Paget's disease is seven times more likely to develop the disease than someone without an affected relative. However, most people with Paget's disease do not have any relatives with the disease. Researchers think the disease also may be caused by other factors, such as a slow-acting virus. A Treatable Disease The good news is that Paget's disease of bone is treatable, especially if it is diagnosed early. In recent years, the Food and Drug Administration has approved several medications that can stop or slow the disease's progression. In some cases, surgery can help patients manage the symptoms and complications of the disease.
Symptoms Many people don't know they have Paget's disease because they have a mild case of the disease and do not have any symptoms. However, people with more advanced cases of the disease will likely have symptoms. Symptoms vary depending on which bone or bones are affected. People with Paget's disease may experience - bone pain  - misshapen bones  - fractures  - osteoarthritis of the joints adjacent to bone affected by the disease.  bone pain misshapen bones fractures osteoarthritis of the joints adjacent to bone affected by the disease. Paget's disease can also cause a variety of neurological complications as a result of compression of nerve tissue by bone affected by the disease. Misshapen bone is most obvious when the leg bones, skull, or bones of the spine are affected. Leg bones may become bowed, the skull may become enlarged, and malformed spinal bones may cause curvature of the spine. Complications People with Paget's disease also are more likely to break bones because bones affected by the disease are more fragile. Enlarged and malformed bones can distort the position of bones and joints. This causes wear and tear on the joints next to bones affected by Paget's disease, resulting in arthritis. On very rare occasions, Paget's disease is linked to the development of osteosarcoma, a type of bone cancer. Less than one percent of patients have this complication.
An Underdiagnosed Disease Experts believe that Paget's disease is underdiagnosed; people with a mild case and no symptoms may never know they have the disease. Or, they may receive a diagnosis by accident when x-rays or other laboratory tests done for another reason reveal Paget's disease. When symptoms do occur, they usually appear gradually and, in the early stages, may be confused with those of arthritis or other medical problems. Sometimes a person may not receive a clear diagnosis until the disease progresses and complications develop. Diagnostic Tests X-rays are almost always used to diagnose Paget's disease, but the disease may be discovered using one of three tests: - x-rays  -  an alkaline phosphatase blood test  -  or a bone scan. x-rays an alkaline phosphatase blood test or a bone scan. Bones affected by Paget's disease have a distinctive appearance on x-rays, which may show increased bone density, an abnormal bone structure, bowing, and enlargement. X-rays of leg bones may show very tiny fractures called microfractures. The enzyme alkaline phosphatase is involved in the normal growth of new bone. Having higher-than-normal levels of this chemical in the blood, however, may be a sign of Paget's disease. The alkaline phosphatase blood test measures the level of this substance. A bone scan provides a picture of the affected bones that doctors can use to see how far the disease has progressed. If a bone scan done for another reason suggests Paget's disease, the doctor can order x-rays to confirm the diagnosis. If the Disease Runs in the Family Early diagnosis and treatment of Paget's disease is important. Because Paget's disease can be hereditary, some experts recommend that the brothers, sisters, and children of anyone with the disease talk to their doctor about having an alkaline phosphatase blood test every 2 to 3 years after about age 40.
Over time, Paget's disease may lead to other medical conditions, including arthritis, headaches, hearing loss, and nervous system problems, depending on which bones are affected. On very rare occasions, Paget's disease is associated with the development of osteosarcoma, a type of bone cancer. Less than one percent of patients have this complication.
The Food and Drug Administration has approved several medications that can stop or slow down the progression of the disease and reduce pain and other symptoms. These medications fall into two categories: bisphosphonates and calcitonin. Doctors most often prescribe one of the four strongest bisphosphonates, which are risedronate, alendronate, pamidronate, and zoledronic acid.