Palpitations (pal-pi-TA-shuns) are feelings that your heart is skipping a beat, fluttering, or beating too hard or too fast. You may have these feelings in your chest, throat, or neck. They can occur during activity or even when you're sitting still or lying down.
                
Overview
                
Many things can trigger palpitations, including:
                
Strong emotions
                
Vigorous physical activity
                
Medicines such as diet pills and decongestants
                
Caffeine, alcohol, nicotine, and illegal drugs
                
Certain medical conditions, such as thyroid disease or anemia (uh-NEE-me-uh)
                
These factors can make the heart beat faster or stronger than usual, or they can cause premature (extra) heartbeats. In these situations, the heart is still working normally. Thus, these palpitations usually are harmless.
                
Some palpitations are symptoms of arrhythmias (ah-RITH-me-ahs). Arrhythmias are problems with the rate or rhythm of the heartbeat.
                
Some arrhythmias are signs of heart conditions, such as heart attack, heart failure, heart valve disease, or heart muscle disease. However, less than half of the people who have palpitations have arrhythmias.
                
You can take steps to reduce or prevent palpitations. Try to avoid things that trigger them (such as stress and stimulants) and treat related medical conditions.
                
Outlook
                
Palpitations are very common. They usually aren't serious or harmful, but they can be bothersome. If you have them, your doctor can decide whether you need treatment or ongoing care.
Some people may be more likely than others to have palpitations. People at increased risk include those who:
                
Have anxiety or panic attacks, or people who are highly stressed
                
Take certain medicines or stimulants
                
Have certain medical conditions that aren't related to heart problems, such as an overactive thyroid
                
Have certain heart problems, such as arrhythmias (irregular heartbeats), a previous heart attack, heart failure, heart valve disease, or heart muscle disease
                
Women who are pregnant, menstruating, or perimenopausal also may be at higher risk for palpitations because of hormonal changes. Some palpitations that occur during pregnancy may be due to anemia.
                
For more information about these risk factors, go to "What Causes Palpitations?"
Symptoms of palpitations include feelings that your heart is:
                
Skipping a beat
                
Fluttering
                
Beating too hard or too fast
                
You may have these feelings in your chest, throat, or neck. They can occur during activity or even when you're sitting still or lying down.
                
Palpitations often are harmless, and your heart is working normally. However, these feelings can be a sign of a more serious problem if you also:
                
Feel dizzy or confused
                
Are light-headed, think you may faint, or do faint
                
Have trouble breathing
                
Have pain, pressure, or tightness in your chest, jaw, or arms
                
Feel short of breath
                
Have unusual sweating
                
Your doctor may have already told you that your palpitations are harmless. Even so, see your doctor again if your palpitations:
                
Start to occur more often or are more noticeable or bothersome
                
Occur with other symptoms, such as those listed above
                
Your doctor will want to check whether your palpitations are the symptom of a heart problem, such as an arrhythmia (irregular heartbeat).
Treatment for palpitations depends on their cause. Most palpitations are harmless and often go away on their own. In these cases, no treatment is needed.
                
Avoiding Triggers
                
Your palpitations may be harmless but bothersome. If so, your doctor may suggest avoiding things that trigger them. For examples, your doctor may advise you to:
                
Reduce anxiety and stress. Anxiety and stress (including panic attacks) are a common cause of harmless palpitations. Relaxation exercises, yoga or tai chi, biofeedback or guided imagery, or aromatherapy may help you relax.
                
Avoid or limit stimulants, such as caffeine, nicotine, or alcohol.
                
Avoid illegal drugs, such as cocaine and amphetamines.
                
Avoid medicines that act as stimulants, such as cough and cold medicines and some herbal and nutritional supplements.
                
Treating Medical Conditions That May Cause Palpitations
                
Work with your doctor to control medical conditions that can cause palpitations, such as an overactive thyroid. If you're taking medicine that's causing palpitations, your doctor will try to find a different medicine for you.
                
If your palpitations are caused by an arrhythmia (irregular heartbeat), your doctor may recommend medicines or procedures to treat the problem. For more information, go to the Health Topics Arrhythmia article.
You can take steps to prevent palpitations. Try to avoid things that trigger them. For example:
                
Reduce anxiety and stress. Anxiety and stress (including panic attacks) are a common cause of harmless palpitations. Relaxation exercises, yoga or tai chi, biofeedback or guided imagery, or aromatherapy may help you relax.
                
Avoid or limit stimulants, such as caffeine, nicotine, or alcohol.
                
Avoid illegal drugs, such as cocaine and amphetamines.
                
Avoid medicines that act as stimulants, such as cough and cold medicines and some herbal and nutritional supplements.
                
Also, work with your doctor to treat medical conditions that can cause palpitations.