Bell's palsy is the most common cause of facial paralysis. It usually affects just one side of the face. Symptoms appear suddenly and are at their worst about 48 hours after they start. They can range from mild to severe and include       - Twitching    - Weakness    - Paralysis    - Drooping eyelid or corner of mouth    - Drooling    - Dry eye or mouth    - Excessive tearing in the eye    - Impaired ability to taste       Scientists think that a viral infection makes the facial nerve swell or become inflamed. You are most likely to get Bell's palsy if you are pregnant, diabetic or sick with a cold or flu.    Three out of four patients improve without treatment. With or without treatment, most people begin to get better within 2 weeks and recover completely within 3 to 6 months.     NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
Bell's palsy is a form of temporary facial paralysis which results from damage or trauma to one of the facial nerves. This disorder is characterized by the sudden onset of facial paralysis that often affects just one side and can cause significant facial distortion. Symptoms vary, but may include twitching, weakness, drooping eyelid or corner of the mouth, drooling, dry eye or mouth, impairment of taste, and excessive tearing in the eye. While the exact cause is unknown, many researchers believe that a virus may lead to swelling of the 7th cranial nerve. Steroids, such as prednisone, may reduce the inflammation and swelling. Other medications used to treat Bell's palsy include acyclovir (to fight viral infections) and aspirin, acetaminophen, or ibuprofen (to relieve pain). Physical therapy, facial massage and acupuncture have also been used.
Steroids such as prednisone -- used to reduce inflammation and swelling -- are an effective treatment for Bell's palsy. Antiviral drugs may have some benefit in shortening the course of the disease. Analgesics such as aspirin, acetaminophen, or ibuprofen may relieve pain. Because of possible drug interactions, individuals should always talk to their doctors before taking any over-the-counter medicines. Keeping the eye moist and protecting it from debris and injury, especially at night, is important. Lubricating eye drops can help. Other therapies such as physical therapy, facial massage or acupuncture may provide a potential small improvement in facial nerve function and pain..
The prognosis for individuals with Bell's palsy is generally very good. The extent of nerve damage determines the extent of recovery. With or without treatment, most individuals begin to get better within 2 weeks after the initial onset of symptoms and recover some or all facial function within 3 to 6 months.
The mission of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) is to seek fundamental knowledge of the brain and nervous system and to use that knowledge to reduce the burden of neurological disease. The NINDS conducts and supports an extensive research program of basic science to increase understanding of how the nervous system works and circumstances that lead to nerve damage. Knowledge gained from this research may help scientists find the definitive cause of Bell's palsy, leading to the discovery of new effective treatments for the disorder. Other NINDS-supported research is aimed at developing methods to repair damaged nerves and restore full use and strength to injured areas, and finding ways to prevent nerve damage and injuries from occurring.