Agenesis of the dorsal pancreas describes a congenital malformation of the pancreas in which either the entire dorsal pancreas or part of the dorsal pancreas fails to develop (complete agenesis or partial agenesis, respectively). Some individuals experience no symptoms, while others may develop hyperglycemia, diabetes mellitus, bile duct obstruction, abdominal pain, pancreatitis, or other conditions. Hyperglycemia has been shown to be present in approximately 50% of affected individuals. The cause of agenesis of the dorsal pancreas is currently not well understood. It may occur in individuals with no history of the condition in the family (sporadically) and in some cases, autosomal dominant or X-linked dominant inheritance has been suggested. It has also been reported to occur with very rare conditions including polysplenia and polysplenia/heterotaxy syndrome.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Agenesis of the dorsal pancreas. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the pancreas 90% Intrauterine growth retardation 90% Maternal diabetes 90% Type I diabetes mellitus 90% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Diabetes mellitus - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Partial or complete agenesis of the dorsal pancreas results from the failure of the dorsal pancreatic bud to form the body and tail of the pancreas in the developing fetus. It may occur from the absence, or regression of, the dorsal bud during fetal development. Heredity may play a role in the development of this condition, but further research is needed to clarify this. There have been reports in the literature of the condition being associated (rarely) with other congenital diseases, specifically a very rare disorder called polysplenia/heterotaxy syndrome. In this case, it may occur due to errors in development of the asymmetric organs and may be associated with benign to severe congenital cardiac (heart) malformations.