Hypokalemic periodic paralysis is a condition that causes episodes of extreme muscle weakness typically beginning in childhood or adolescence. Most often, these episodes involve a temporary inability to move muscles in the arms and legs. The duration and frequency of the episodes may vary. Hypokalemic periodic paralysis is caused by mutations in the CACNA1S and SCN4A genes which are inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. A small percentage of people with the characteristic features of hypokalemic periodic paralysis do not have identified mutations in these genes. In these cases, the cause of the condition is unknown. Paralytic crises can be treated with oral or IV potassium. Other management includes prevention of crises and support of specific symptoms.
 Hypokalemic periodic paralysis is caused by mutations in the CACNA1S and SCN4A genes. The CACNA1S and SCN4A genes provide instructions for making proteins that play an essential role in muscles used for movement (skeletal muscles). For the body to move normally, these muscles must tense (contract) and relax in a coordinated way. Muscle contractions are triggered by the flow of certain positively charged atoms (ions) into muscle cells. The CACNA1S and SCN4A proteins form channels that control the flow of these ions. The channel formed by the CACNA1S protein transports calcium ions into cells, while the channel formed by the SCN4A protein transports sodium ions. Mutations in the CACNA1S or SCN4A gene alter the usual structure and function of calcium or sodium channels. The altered channels cannot properly regulate the flow of ions into muscle cells, which reduces the ability of skeletal muscles to contract. Because muscle contraction is needed for movement, a disruption in normal ion transport leads to episodes of severe muscle weakness or paralysis. A small percentage of people with the characteristic features of hypokalemic periodic paralysis do not have identified mutations in the CACNA1S or SCN4A gene. In these cases, the cause of the condition is unknown.
How  This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person has one parent with the condition.
 The diagnosis of hypokalemic periodic paralysis is based on a history of episodes of paralysis and low levels of potassium in the blood during attacks (less than 0.9 to 3.0 mmol/L), but not between attacks. An important part of the diagnosis is to rule out other potential causes, including myotonia, hyperthyroidism, and arrhythmia. Affected individuals typically have a family history consistent with autosomal dominant inheritance. Genetic testing is available for hypokalemic periodic paralysis. Of all individuals meeting diagnostic criteria for this condition, approximately 55 to 70 percent have mutations in the CACNA1S gene, and approximately 8 to 10 percent have mutations in the SCN4A gene. GeneTests lists the names of laboratories that perform clinical genetic testing of the CACNA1S and SCN4A genes for hypokalemic periodic paralysis. When a disease-causing mutation is identified in an affected individual, genetic testing can be performed for at-risk, asymptomatic family members. Please note:  Most of the laboratories listed through GeneTests do not accept direct contact from patients and their families; therefore, if you are interested in learning more, you will need to work with a health care provider or a genetics professional.  See below for a list of online resources that can assist you in locating a genetics professional near you.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Goiter - Heterogeneous - Hyperthyroidism - Hypokalemia - Muscle weakness - Palpitations - Periodic paralysis - Rhabdomyolysis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis is a genetic condition that causes episodes of extreme muscle weakness, usually beginning in infancy or early childhood. Most often, these episodes involve a temporary inability to move muscles in the arms and legs. Episodes tend to increase in frequency until about age 25, after which they may occur less frequently. Factors that can trigger attacks include rest after exercise, potassium-rich foods, stress, fatigue, and long periods without food. Muscle strength improves between attacks, although many affected people continue to experience mild stiffness, particularly in muscles of the face and hands. This condition is caused by mutations in the SCN4A gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Cerebral palsy 90% EMG abnormality 90% Gait disturbance 50% Hyperkalemia 50% Involuntary movements 50% Myalgia 50% Myotonia 50% Arrhythmia 7.5% Bowel incontinence 7.5% Chest pain 7.5% Congestive heart failure 7.5% Feeding difficulties in infancy 7.5% Flexion contracture 7.5% Hypertonia 7.5% Hypokalemia 7.5% Hyponatremia 7.5% Malignant hyperthermia 7.5% Myopathy 7.5% Ophthalmoparesis 7.5% Paresthesia 7.5% Respiratory insufficiency 7.5% Skeletal muscle atrophy 7.5% Skeletal muscle hypertrophy 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Episodic flaccid weakness - Infantile onset - Periodic hyperkalemic paralysis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis is a condition that causes episodes of extreme muscle weakness or paralysis, usually beginning in infancy or early childhood. Most often, these episodes involve a temporary inability to move muscles in the arms and legs. Episodes tend to increase in frequency until mid-adulthood, after which they occur less frequently. Factors that can trigger attacks include rest after exercise, potassium-rich foods such as bananas and potatoes, stress, fatigue, alcohol, pregnancy, exposure to cold temperatures, certain medications, and periods without food (fasting). Muscle strength usually returns to normal between attacks, although many affected people continue to experience mild stiffness (myotonia), particularly in muscles of the face and hands.  Most people with hyperkalemic periodic paralysis have increased levels of potassium in their blood (hyperkalemia) during attacks. Hyperkalemia results when the weak or paralyzed muscles release potassium ions into the bloodstream. In other cases, attacks are associated with normal blood potassium levels (normokalemia). Ingesting potassium can trigger attacks in affected individuals, even if blood potassium levels do not go up.
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis affects an estimated 1 in 200,000 people.
Mutations in the SCN4A gene can cause hyperkalemic periodic paralysis. The SCN4A gene provides instructions for making a protein that plays an essential role in muscles used for movement (skeletal muscles). For the body to move normally, these muscles must tense (contract) and relax in a coordinated way. One of the changes that helps trigger muscle contractions is the flow of positively charged atoms (ions), including sodium, into muscle cells. The SCN4A protein forms channels that control the flow of sodium ions into these cells.  Mutations in the SCN4A gene alter the usual structure and function of sodium channels. The altered channels stay open too long or do not stay closed long enough, allowing more sodium ions to flow into muscle cells. This increase in sodium ions triggers the release of potassium from muscle cells, which causes more sodium channels to open and stimulates the flow of even more sodium ions into these cells. These changes in ion transport reduce the ability of skeletal muscles to contract, leading to episodes of muscle weakness or paralysis.  In 30 to 40 percent of cases, the cause of hyperkalemic periodic paralysis is unknown. Changes in other genes, which have not been identified, likely cause the disorder in these cases.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of hyperkalemic periodic paralysis:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Hyperkalemic Periodic Paralysis  - Genetic Testing Registry: Familial hyperkalemic periodic paralysis  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hyperkalemic Periodic Paralysis Type 1  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hyperkalemic Periodic Paralysis  - Periodic Paralysis International: How is Periodic Paralysis Diagnosed?   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Hypokalemic periodic paralysis is a condition that causes episodes of extreme muscle weakness typically beginning in childhood or adolescence. Most often, these episodes involve a temporary inability to move muscles in the arms and legs. Attacks cause severe weakness or paralysis that usually lasts from hours to days. Some people may have episodes almost every day, while others experience them weekly, monthly, or only rarely. Attacks can occur without warning or can be triggered by factors such as rest after exercise, a viral illness, or certain medications. Often, a large, carbohydrate-rich meal or vigorous exercise in the evening can trigger an attack upon waking the following morning. Although affected individuals usually regain their muscle strength between attacks, repeated episodes can lead to persistent muscle weakness later in life.  People with hypokalemic periodic paralysis have reduced levels of potassium in their blood (hypokalemia) during episodes of muscle weakness. Researchers are investigating how low potassium levels may be related to the muscle abnormalities in this condition.
Although its exact prevalence is unknown, hypokalemic periodic paralysis is estimated to affect 1 in 100,000 people. Men tend to experience symptoms of this condition more often than women.
Mutations in the CACNA1S and SCN4A genes cause hypokalemic periodic paralysis.  The CACNA1S and SCN4A genes provide instructions for making proteins that play an essential role in muscles used for movement (skeletal muscles). For the body to move normally, these muscles must tense (contract) and relax in a coordinated way. Muscle contractions are triggered by the flow of certain positively charged atoms (ions) into muscle cells. The CACNA1S and SCN4A proteins form channels that control the flow of these ions. The channel formed by the CACNA1S protein transports calcium ions into cells, while the channel formed by the SCN4A protein transports sodium ions.  Mutations in the CACNA1S or SCN4A gene alter the usual structure and function of calcium or sodium channels. The altered channels cannot properly regulate the flow of ions into muscle cells, which reduces the ability of skeletal muscles to contract. Because muscle contraction is needed for movement, a disruption in normal ion transport leads to episodes of severe muscle weakness or paralysis.  A small percentage of people with the characteristic features of hypokalemic periodic paralysis do not have identified mutations in the CACNA1S or SCN4A gene. In these cases, the cause of the condition is unknown.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of hypokalemic periodic paralysis:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Hypokalemic Periodic Paralysis  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hypokalemic periodic paralysis  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hypokalemic periodic paralysis   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care