 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spastic paraplegia 14. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Adult onset - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Babinski sign - Hyperreflexia - Intellectual disability, mild - Lower limb muscle weakness - Lower limb spasticity - Motor axonal neuropathy - Pes cavus - Progressive - Spastic gait - Spastic paraplegia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spastic paraplegia 18. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Hypoplasia of the corpus callosum 5% Intellectual disability 5% Seizures 5% Absent speech - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Babinski sign - Gait disturbance - High palate - Hyperreflexia - Kyphosis - Lower limb muscle weakness - Pes cavus - Progressive - Scoliosis - Skeletal muscle atrophy - Slow progression - Spastic paraplegia - Strabismus - Upper limb spasticity - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spastic paraplegia 15. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Peripheral axonal neuropathy 5/9 Retinal degeneration 3/7 Nystagmus 4/10 Ataxia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Babinski sign - Bowel incontinence - Clonus - Distal amyotrophy - Dysarthria - Hypoplasia of the corpus callosum - Intellectual disability - Lower limb muscle weakness - Lower limb spasticity - Macular degeneration - Mood swings - Pes cavus - Phenotypic variability - Progressive - Psychosis - Reduced visual acuity - Spastic gait - Spastic paraplegia - Urinary bladder sphincter dysfunction - Urinary incontinence - Urinary urgency - Visual impairment - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spastic paraplegia 51. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Babinski sign - Bulbous nose - Cerebellar atrophy - Cerebral cortical atrophy - Coarse facial features - Congenital onset - Decreased muscle mass - Drooling - Facial hypotonia - Flexion contracture - Hyperreflexia - Intellectual disability, severe - Long nose - Microcephaly - Narrow face - Narrow forehead - Neonatal hypotonia - Nystagmus - Pointed chin - Prominent antihelix - Seizures - Short philtrum - Short stature - Spastic paraplegia - Spastic tetraplegia - Talipes equinovarus - Ventriculomegaly - Wide mouth - Wide nasal bridge - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Spastic paraplegia 11 is a form of hereditary spastic paraplegia. People with spastic paraplegia 11 experience progressive muscle stiffness and eventual paralysis of the lower limbs, as well as a range of other neurologic symptoms. The tissue connecting the left and right halves of the brain (corpus callosum) is abnormally thin in individuals with this condition. Spastic paraplegia 11 is caused by mutations in the SPG11 gene and is passed through families in an autosomal recessive fashion.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spastic paraplegia 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Gait disturbance 90% Hyperreflexia 90% Muscle weakness 90% Abnormal renal physiology 50% Abnormality of extrapyramidal motor function 50% Bowel incontinence 50% Cognitive impairment 50% Optic atrophy 50% Incoordination 7.5% Limitation of joint mobility 7.5% Neurological speech impairment 7.5% Nystagmus 7.5% Pulmonary embolism 7.5% Recurrent respiratory infections 7.5% Babinski sign - Degeneration of the lateral corticospinal tracts - Dysarthria - Dysmetria - Flexion contracture - Intellectual disability - Juvenile onset - Lower limb muscle weakness - Lower limb spasticity - Pes cavus - Phenotypic variability - Skeletal muscle atrophy - Spastic gait - Spastic paraparesis - Spastic paraplegia - Spinocerebellar tract degeneration - X-linked recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spastic paraplegia 4. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Aggressive behavior - Agitation - Apathy - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Babinski sign - Degeneration of the lateral corticospinal tracts - Dementia - Depression - Disinhibition - Genetic anticipation - Hyperreflexia - Impaired vibration sensation in the lower limbs - Insidious onset - Intellectual disability - Low back pain - Lower limb muscle weakness - Memory impairment - Nystagmus - Paraplegia - Progressive - Spastic gait - Spastic paraplegia - Urinary bladder sphincter dysfunction - Urinary incontinence - Urinary urgency - Variable expressivity - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spastic paraplegia 39. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Ataxia 5% Cerebellar atrophy 5% Atrophy of the spinal cord - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Babinski sign - Distal amyotrophy - Distal lower limb muscle weakness - Gait disturbance - Hyperreflexia - Progressive spastic paraplegia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spastic paraplegia 10. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Ataxia 5% Parkinsonism 5% Ankle clonus - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Babinski sign - Distal sensory impairment - Hyperreflexia - Impaired vibration sensation in the lower limbs - Knee clonus - Lower limb muscle weakness - Pes cavus - Phenotypic variability - Progressive - Scoliosis - Spastic gait - Spastic paraplegia - Urinary bladder sphincter dysfunction - Urinary incontinence - Urinary urgency - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spastic paraplegia 5B. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Spastic paraplegia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spastic paraplegia 17. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Babinski sign - First dorsal interossei muscle atrophy - First dorsal interossei muscle weakness - Hyperreflexia - Impaired vibration sensation in the lower limbs - Lower limb muscle weakness - Lower limb spasticity - Pes cavus - Slow progression - Spastic gait - Spastic paraplegia - Thenar muscle atrophy - Thenar muscle weakness - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spastic paraplegia 6. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Tremor 5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Babinski sign - Clonus - Degeneration of the lateral corticospinal tracts - Impaired vibration sensation in the lower limbs - Insidious onset - Lower limb muscle weakness - Lower limb spasticity - Pes cavus - Progressive - Seizures - Spastic gait - Spastic paraplegia - Urinary bladder sphincter dysfunction - Urinary incontinence - Urinary urgency - Variable expressivity - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP), also called familial spastic paraparesis (FSP), refers to a group of inherited disorders that are characterized by progressive weakness and spasticity (stiffness) of the legs. Early in the disease course, there may be mild gait difficulties and stiffness. These symptoms typically slowly progress so that eventually individuals with HSP may require the assistance of a cane, walker, or wheelchair. Though the primary features of "pure" HSP are progressive lower limb spasticity and weakness, complicated forms may be accompanied by other symptoms. These additional symptoms include impaired vision due to cataracts and problems with the optic nerve and retina of the eye, ataxia (lack of muscle coordination), epilepsy, cognitive impairment, peripheral neuropathy, and deafness. The diagnosis of HSP is primarily by neurological examination and testing to rule out other disorders. Brain MRI abnormalities, such as a thin corpus callosum, may be seen in some of the complicated forms of HSP. Several genetic mutations have been identified which underlie various forms of HSP, and specialized genetic testing and diagnosis are available at some medical centers. HSP has several forms of inheritance. Not all children in a family will necessarily develop symptoms, although they may be carriers of the abnormal gene. Symptoms may begin in childhood or adulthood, depending on the particular HSP gene involved.
There are no specific treatments to prevent, slow, or reverse HSP. Symptomatic treatments used for spasticity, such as muscle relaxants, are sometimes helpful. Regular physical therapy is important for muscle strength and to preserve range of motion.
The prognosis for individuals with HSP varies Some individuals are very disabled and others have only mild disability. The majority of individuals with uncomplicated HSP have a normal life expectancy.
Spastic paraplegia type 8 is part of a group of genetic disorders known as hereditary spastic paraplegias. These disorders are characterized by progressive muscle stiffness (spasticity) and the development of paralysis of the lower limbs (paraplegia). Hereditary spastic paraplegias are divided into two types: pure and complex. The pure types involve only the nerves and muscles controlling the lower limbs and bladder, whereas the complex types also have significant involvement of the nervous system in other parts of the body. Spastic paraplegia type 8 is a pure hereditary spastic paraplegia.  Like all hereditary spastic paraplegias, spastic paraplegia type 8 involves spasticity of the leg muscles and muscle weakness. People with this condition can also experience exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia), a decreased ability to feel vibrations, muscle wasting (amyotrophy), and reduced bladder control. The signs and symptoms of spastic paraplegia type 8 usually appear in early to mid-adulthood. As the muscle weakness and spasticity get worse, some people may need the aid of a cane, walker, or wheelchair.
The prevalence of all hereditary spastic paraplegias combined is estimated to be 1 to 18 in 100,000 people worldwide. Spastic paraplegia type 8 likely accounts for only a small percentage of all spastic paraplegia cases.
Mutations in the KIAA0196 gene cause spastic paraplegia type 8. The KIAA0196 gene provides instructions for making a protein called strumpellin. Strumpellin is active (expressed) throughout the body, although its exact function is unknown. The protein's structure suggests that strumpellin may interact with the structural framework inside cells (the cytoskeleton) and may attach (bind) to other proteins.  KIAA0196 gene mutations are thought to change the structure of the strumpellin protein. It is unknown how the altered strumpellin protein causes the signs and symptoms of spastic paraplegia type 8.
Spastic paraplegia type 8 is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  In most cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of spastic paraplegia type 8:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Spastic Paraplegia 8  - Genetic Testing Registry: Spastic paraplegia 8  - Spastic Paraplegia Foundation, Inc.: Treatments and Therapies   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Spastic paraplegia type 15 is part of a group of genetic disorders known as hereditary spastic paraplegias. These disorders are characterized by progressive muscle stiffness (spasticity) and the development of paralysis of the lower limbs (paraplegia). Spastic paraplegia type 15 is classified as a complex hereditary spastic paraplegia because it involves all four limbs as well as additional features, including abnormalities of the brain. In addition to the muscles and brain, spastic paraplegia type 15 affects the peripheral nervous system, which consists of nerves connecting the brain and spinal cord to muscles and sensory cells that detect sensations such as touch, pain, heat, and sound.  Spastic paraplegia type 15 usually becomes apparent in childhood or adolescence with the development of weak muscle tone (hypotonia), difficulty walking, or intellectual disability. In almost all affected individuals, the tissue connecting the left and right halves of the brain (corpus callosum) is abnormally thin and becomes thinner over time. Additionally, there is often a loss (atrophy) of nerve cells in several parts of the brain, including the cerebral cortex, which controls thinking and emotions, and the cerebellum, which coordinates movement.  People with this form of spastic paraplegia can have numbness, tingling, or pain in the arms and legs (sensory neuropathy); impairment of the nerves used for muscle movement (motor neuropathy); exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia) of the lower limbs; muscle wasting (amyotrophy); or reduced bladder control. Rarely, spastic paraplegia type 15 is associated with a group of movement abnormalities called parkinsonism, which includes tremors, rigidity, and unusually slow movement (bradykinesia). People with spastic paraplegia type 15 may have an eye condition called pigmentary maculopathy that often impairs vision. This condition results from the breakdown (degeneration) of tissue at the back of the eye called the macula, which is responsible for sharp central vision.  Most people with spastic paraplegia type 15 experience a decline in intellectual ability and an increase in muscle weakness and nerve abnormalities over time. As the condition progresses, many people require walking aids or wheelchair assistance in adulthood.
Spastic paraplegia type 15 is a rare condition, although its exact prevalence is unknown.
Mutations in the ZFYVE26 gene cause spastic paraplegia type 15. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called spastizin. This protein is important in a process called autophagy, in which worn-out cell parts and unneeded proteins are recycled within cells. Specifically, spastizin is involved in the formation and maturation of sacs called autophagosomes (or autophagic vacuoles) that transport unneeded materials to be broken down. Spastizin also plays a role in the process by which dividing cells separate from one another (cytokinesis).  Many ZFYVE26 gene mutations that cause spastic paraplegia type 15 result in a shortened spastizin protein that is quickly broken down. As a result, functional autophagosomes are not produced, autophagy cannot occur, and recycling of materials within cells is decreased. An inability to break down unneeded materials, and the subsequent accumulation of these materials in cells, leads to cell dysfunction and often cell death. The loss of cells in the brain and other parts of the body is responsible for many of the features of spastic paraplegia type 15.  It is unclear whether a lack of spastizin protein interferes with normal cytokinesis and whether impaired cell division contributes to the signs and symptoms of spastic paraplegia type 15.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of spastic paraplegia type 15:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia Overview  - Spastic Paraplegia Foundation, Inc: Treatments and Therapies   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Spastic paraplegia type 2 is part of a group of genetic disorders known as hereditary spastic paraplegias. These disorders are characterized by progressive muscle stiffness (spasticity) and the development of paralysis of the lower limbs (paraplegia). Hereditary spastic paraplegias are divided into two types: pure and complex. The pure types involve the lower limbs. The complex types involve the lower limbs and can also affect the upper limbs to a lesser degree; the structure or functioning of the brain; and the nerves connecting the brain and spinal cord to muscles and sensory cells that detect sensations such as touch, pain, heat, and sound (the peripheral nervous system). Spastic paraplegia type 2 can occur in either the pure or complex form.  People with the pure form of spastic paraplegia type 2 experience spasticity in the lower limbs, usually without any additional features. People with the complex form of spastic paraplegia type 2 have lower limb spasticity and can also experience problems with movement and balance (ataxia); involuntary movements of the eyes (nystagmus); mild intellectual disability; involuntary, rhythmic shaking (tremor); and degeneration (atrophy) of the optic nerves, which carry information from the eyes to the brain. Symptoms usually become apparent between the ages of 1 and 5 years; those affected are typically able to walk and have a normal lifespan.
The prevalence of all hereditary spastic paraplegias combined is estimated to be 2 to 6 in 100,000 people worldwide. Spastic paraplegia type 2 likely accounts for only a small percentage of all spastic paraplegia cases.
Mutations in the PLP1 gene cause spastic paraplegia 2. The PLP1 gene provides instructions for producing proteolipid protein 1 and a modified version (isoform) of proteolipid protein 1, called DM20. Proteolipid protein 1 and DM20 are primarily located in the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system) and are the main proteins found in myelin, the fatty covering that insulates nerve fibers. A lack of proteolipid protein 1 and DM20 can cause a reduction in the formation of myelin (dysmyelination) which can impair nervous system function, resulting in the signs and symptoms of spastic paraplegia type 2.
This condition is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. A condition is considered X-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. Because females have two copies of the X chromosome, one altered copy of the gene in each cell usually leads to less severe symptoms in females than in males, or may cause no symptoms at all. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.  In X-linked recessive inheritance, a female with one altered copy of the gene in each cell is called a carrier. She can pass on the gene, but generally does not experience signs and symptoms of the disorder. Some females who carry a PLP1 mutation, however, may experience muscle stiffness and a decrease in intellectual function. Females with one PLP1 mutation have an increased risk of experiencing progressive deterioration of cognitive functions (dementia) later in life.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of spastic paraplegia type 2:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia Overview  - Gene Review: Gene Review: PLP1-Related Disorders  - Genetic Testing Registry: Spastic paraplegia 2  - Spastic Paraplegia Foundation, Inc.: Treatments and Therapies   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Spastic paraplegia type 4 is part of a group of genetic disorders known as hereditary spastic paraplegias. These disorders are characterized by progressive muscle stiffness (spasticity) and the development of paralysis of the lower limbs (paraplegia). Hereditary spastic paraplegias are divided into two types: pure and complex. The pure types involve only the lower limbs, whereas the complex types also involve the upper limbs (to a lesser degree) and the nervous system. Spastic paraplegia type 4 is a pure hereditary spastic paraplegia.  Like all hereditary spastic paraplegias, spastic paraplegia type 4 involves spasticity of the leg muscles and muscle weakness. People with this condition can also experience exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia), ankle spasms, high-arched feet (pes cavus), and reduced bladder control. Spastic paraplegia type 4 generally affects nerve and muscle function in the lower half of the body only.
The prevalence of spastic paraplegia type 4 is estimated to be 2 to 6 in 100,000 people worldwide.
Mutations in the SPAST gene cause spastic paraplegia type 4. The SPAST gene provides instructions for producing a protein called spastin. Spastin is found throughout the body, particularly in certain nerve cells (neurons). The spastin protein plays a role in the function of microtubules, which are rigid, hollow fibers that make up the cell's structural framework (the cytoskeleton). Microtubules are also involved in transporting cell components and facilitating cell division. Spastin likely helps restrict microtubule length and disassemble microtubule structures when they are no longer needed. Mutations in spastin impair the microtubules' ability to transport cell components, especially in nerve cells; researchers believe this contributes to the major signs and symptoms of spastic paraplegia type 4.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  In most cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. The remaining cases may result from new mutations in the gene. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of spastic paraplegia type 4:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia Overview  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Spastic Paraplegia 4  - Genetic Testing Registry: Spastic paraplegia 4, autosomal dominant  - Spastic Paraplegia Foundation, Inc.: Treatments and Therapies   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Spastic paraplegia type 31 is one of a group of genetic disorders known as hereditary spastic paraplegias. These disorders are characterized by progressive muscle stiffness (spasticity) and the development of paralysis of the lower limbs (paraplegia) caused by degeneration of nerve cells (neurons) that trigger muscle movement. Hereditary spastic paraplegias are divided into two types: pure and complicated. The pure types involve only the lower limbs, while the complicated types also involve the upper limbs and other areas of the body, including the brain. Spastic paraplegia type 31 is usually a pure hereditary spastic paraplegia, although a few complicated cases have been reported.  The first signs and symptoms of spastic paraplegia type 31 usually appear before age 20 or after age 30. An early feature is difficulty walking due to spasticity and weakness, which typically affect both legs equally. People with spastic paraplegia type 31 can also experience progressive muscle wasting (amyotrophy) in the lower limbs, exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia), a decreased ability to feel vibrations, reduced bladder control, and high-arched feet (pes cavus). As the condition progresses, some individuals require walking support.
Spastic paraplegia type 31 is one of a subgroup of hereditary spastic paraplegias known as autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia, which has an estimated prevalence of one to 12 per 100,000 individuals. Spastic paraplegia type 31 accounts for 3 to 9 percent of all autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia cases.
Spastic paraplegia type 31 is caused by mutations in the REEP1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called receptor expression-enhancing protein 1 (REEP1), which is found in neurons in the brain and spinal cord. The REEP1 protein is located within cell compartments called mitochondria, which are the energy-producing centers in cells, and the endoplasmic reticulum, which helps with protein processing and transport. The REEP1 protein plays a role in regulating the size of the endoplasmic reticulum and determining how many proteins it can process. The function of the REEP1 protein in the mitochondria is unknown.  REEP1 gene mutations that cause spastic paraplegia type 31 result in a short, nonfunctional protein that is usually broken down quickly. As a result, there is a reduction in functional REEP1 protein. It is unclear how REEP1 gene mutations lead to the signs and symptoms of spastic paraplegia type 31. Researchers have shown that mitochondria in cells of affected individuals are less able to produce energy, which may contribute to the death of neurons and lead to the progressive movement problems of spastic paraplegia type 31; however, the exact mechanism that causes this condition is unknown.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of spastic paraplegia type 31:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia Overview  - Genetic Testing Registry: Spastic paraplegia 31, autosomal dominant  - Spastic Paraplegia Foundation, Inc.: Treatments and Therapies   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Spastic paraplegia type 3A is one of a group of genetic disorders known as hereditary spastic paraplegias. These disorders are characterized by muscle stiffness (spasticity) and weakness in the lower limbs (paraplegia). Hereditary spastic paraplegias are often divided into two types: pure and complex. The pure types involve only the lower limbs, while the complex types also involve other areas of the body; additional features can include changes in vision, changes in intellectual functioning, difficulty walking, and disturbances in nerve function (neuropathy). Spastic paraplegia type 3A is usually a pure hereditary spastic paraplegia, although a few complex cases have been reported.  In addition to spasticity and weakness, which typically affect both legs equally, people with spastic paraplegia type 3A can also experience progressive muscle wasting (amyotrophy) in the lower limbs, reduced bladder control, an abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis), loss of sensation in the feet (peripheral neuropathy), or high arches of the feet (pes cavus). The signs and symptoms of spastic paraplegia type 3A usually appear before the age of 10; the average age of onset is 4 years. In some affected individuals the condition slowly worsens over time, sometimes leading to a need for walking support.
Spastic paraplegia type 3A belongs to a subgroup of hereditary spastic paraplegias known as autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia, which has an estimated prevalence of 2 to 9 per 100,000 individuals. Spastic paraplegia type 3A accounts for 10 to 15 percent of all autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia cases.
Mutations in the ATL1 gene cause spastic paraplegia type 3A. The ATL1 gene provides instructions for producing a protein called atlastin-1. Atlastin-1 is produced primarily in the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system), particularly in nerve cells (neurons) that extend down the spinal cord (corticospinal tracts). These neurons send electrical signals that lead to voluntary muscle movement. Atlastin-1 is involved in the growth of specialized extensions of neurons, called axons, which transmit nerve impulses that signal muscle movement. The protein also likely plays a role in the normal functioning of multiple structures within neurons and in distributing materials within these cells.  ATL1 gene mutations likely lead to a shortage of normal atlastin-1 protein, which impairs the functioning of neurons, including the distribution of materials within these cells. This lack of functional atlastin-1 protein may also restrict the growth of axons. These problems can lead to the abnormal functioning or death of the long neurons of the corticospinal tracts. As a result, the neurons are unable to transmit nerve impulses, particularly to other neurons and muscles in the lower extremities. This impaired nerve function leads to the signs and symptoms of spastic paraplegia type 3A.
Spastic paraplegia type 3A is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In approximately 95 percent of cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of spastic paraplegia type 3A:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia Overview  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Spastic Paraplegia 3A  - Genetic Testing Registry: Spastic paraplegia 3  - Spastic Paraplegia Foundation, Inc.: Treatments and Therapies   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Spastic paraplegia type 7 is part of a group of genetic disorders known as hereditary spastic paraplegias. These disorders are characterized by progressive muscle stiffness (spasticity) and the development of paralysis of the lower limbs (paraplegia). Hereditary spastic paraplegias are divided into two types: pure and complex. The pure types involve the lower limbs. The complex types involve the lower limbs and can also affect the upper limbs to a lesser degree; the structure or functioning of the brain; and the nerves connecting the brain and spinal cord to muscles and sensory cells that detect sensations such as touch, pain, heat, and sound (the peripheral nervous system). Spastic paraplegia type 7 can occur in either the pure or complex form.  Like all hereditary spastic paraplegias, spastic paraplegia type 7 involves spasticity of the leg muscles and increased muscle weakness. People with this form of spastic paraplegia can also experience exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia) in the arms; speech difficulties (dysarthria); difficulty swallowing (dysphagia); involuntary movements of the eyes (nystagmus); mild hearing loss; abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis); high-arched feet (pes cavus); numbness, tingling, or pain in the arms and legs (sensory neuropathy); disturbance in the nerves used for muscle movement (motor neuropathy); and muscle wasting (amyotrophy). The onset of symptoms varies greatly among those with spastic paraplegia type 7; however, abnormalities in muscle tone and other features are usually noticeable in adulthood.
The prevalence of all hereditary spastic paraplegias combined is estimated to be 2 to 6 in 100,000 people worldwide. Spastic paraplegia type 7 likely accounts for only a small percentage of all spastic paraplegia cases.
Mutations in the SPG7 gene cause spastic paraplegia type 7. The SPG7 gene provides instructions for producing a protein called paraplegin. Located within the inner membrane of the energy-producing centers of cells (mitochondria), paraplegin is one of the proteins that form a complex called the m-AAA protease. The m-AAA protease is responsible for assembling ribosomes (cellular structures that process the cell's genetic instructions to create proteins) and removing nonfunctional proteins in the mitochondria. When there is a mutation in paraplegin, the m-AAA protease cannot function correctly. Nonfunctional m-AAA proteases cause a build up of unusable proteins in the mitochondria of nerve cells, which can result in swelling of the cell, reduced cell signaling, and impaired cell movement, leading to the major signs and symptoms of spastic paraplegia type 7.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of spastic paraplegia type 7:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia Overview  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Spastic Paraplegia 7  - Genetic Testing Registry: Spastic paraplegia 7  - Spastic Paraplegia Foundation, Inc.: Treatments and Therapies   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Spastic paraplegia type 11 is part of a group of genetic disorders known as hereditary spastic paraplegias. These disorders are characterized by progressive muscle stiffness (spasticity) and the development of paralysis of the lower limbs (paraplegia). Hereditary spastic paraplegias are divided into two types: pure and complex. The pure types involve the lower limbs. The complex types involve the lower limbs and can affect the upper limbs to a lesser degree. Complex spastic paraplegias also affect the structure or functioning of the brain and the peripheral nervous system, which consists of nerves connecting the brain and spinal cord to muscles and sensory cells that detect sensations such as touch, pain, heat, and sound. Spastic paraplegia type 11 is a complex hereditary spastic paraplegia.  Like all hereditary spastic paraplegias, spastic paraplegia type 11 involves spasticity of the leg muscles and muscle weakness. In almost all individuals with this type of spastic paraplegia, the tissue connecting the left and right halves of the brain (corpus callosum) is abnormally thin. People with this form of spastic paraplegia can also experience numbness, tingling, or pain in the arms and legs (sensory neuropathy); disturbance in the nerves used for muscle movement (motor neuropathy); intellectual disability; exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia) of the lower limbs; speech difficulties (dysarthria); reduced bladder control; and muscle wasting (amyotrophy). Less common features include difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), high-arched feet (pes cavus), an abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis), and involuntary movements of the eyes (nystagmus). The onset of symptoms varies greatly; however, abnormalities in muscle tone and difficulty walking usually become noticeable in adolescence.  Many features of spastic paraplegia type 11 are progressive. Most people experience a decline in intellectual ability and an increase in muscle weakness and nerve abnormalities over time. As the condition progresses, some people require wheelchair assistance.
Over 100 cases of spastic paraplegia type 11 have been reported. Although this condition is thought to be rare, its exact prevalence is unknown.
Mutations in the SPG11 gene cause spastic paraplegia type 11. The SPG11 gene provides instructions for making the protein spatacsin. Spatacsin is active (expressed) throughout the nervous system, although its exact function is unknown. Researchers speculate that spatacsin may be involved in the maintenance of axons, which are specialized extensions of nerve cells (neurons) that transmit impulses throughout the nervous system.  SPG11 gene mutations typically change the structure of the spatacsin protein. The effect that the altered spatacsin protein has on the nervous system is not known. Researchers suggest that mutations in spatacsin may cause the signs and symptoms of spastic paraplegia type 11 by interfering with the protein's proposed role in the maintenance of axons.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of spastic paraplegia type 11:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Spastic Paraplegia 11  - Genetic Testing Registry: Spastic paraplegia 11, autosomal recessive  - Spastic Paraplegia Foundation, Inc.: Treatments and Therapies   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care