Pemphigus vulgaris is an autoimmune disorder that involves blistering of the skin and mucous membranes. It occurs almost exclusively in middle-aged or older people. Many cases begin with blisters in the mouth, followed by skin blisters that may come and go. In most cases, the exact cause of pemphigus vulgaris is unknown. It has rarely been observed in multiple members of the same family. Treatment is aimed at reducing symptoms and preventing complications. Severe cases are treated similarly to severe burns.
 Pemphigus vulgaris is an autoimmune disorder. The immune system produces antibodies against specific proteins in the skin and mucous membranes. These antibodies create a reaction that cause skin cells to separate. Although it is rare, some cases of pemphigus vulgaris are caused by certain medications. Medications that may cause this condition include: Blood pressure medications called ACE inhibitors Chelating agents such as penicillamine, which remove certain materials from the blood While in many cases the exact cause of pemphigus vulgaris remains unknown, several potentially relevant factors have been identified. Genetic factors: Predisposition to pemphigus is linked to genetic factors.Certain major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II molecules, in particular alleles of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) DR4, appear to confer susceptibility to pemphigus vulgaris. Age: Peak age of onset is from 50-60 years. Infants with neonatal pemphigus typically recover after protection from their mother's antibodies have cleared their systems. The disease may, nonetheless, develop in children or in older persons, as well. Disease association: Pemphigus commonly occurs in individuals who also have other autoimmune diseases, particularly myasthenia gravis and thymoma. Pemphigus is not contagious. It does not spread from person to person. Though there can be a genetic predisposition to develop pemphigus, there is no indication the disease is hereditary.
Familial pemphigus vulgaris refers to a cluster of pemphigus vulgaris within a family. Pemphigus vulgaris is a rare autoimmune condition that is characterized by blisters and sores on the skin and mucus membranes. Although the exact cause of familial pemphigus vulgaris is unknown, autoimmune conditions generally occur when the body's immune system mistakenly attacks healthy tissue (in this case, the skin and mucus membranes). Most cases of pemphigus vulgaris occur sporadically in people with no family history of the condition; however, rare reports exist of "familial" cases which affect more than one member of a single family. In these cases, the underlying genetic cause is unknown, although an association between pemphigus vulgaris and certain HLA antigens has been identified. Treatment generally includes medications and other strategies to decrease blister formation, prevent infections and promote healing.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Familial pemphigus vulgaris. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Acantholysis 90% Atypical scarring of skin 90% Feeding difficulties in infancy 90% Recurrent cutaneous abscess formation 90% Urticaria 90% Weight loss 90% Autoimmune antibody positivity - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Oral mucosal blisters - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.