Arteries Clogged With Plaque Peripheral arterial disease (P.A.D.) is a disease in which plaque (plak) builds up in the arteries that carry blood to your head, organs, and limbs. Plaque is made up of fat, cholesterol, calcium, fibrous tissue, and other substances in the blood. When plaque builds up in the body's arteries, the condition is called atherosclerosis (ATH-er-o-skler-O-sis). Over time, plaque can harden and narrow the arteries. This limits the flow of oxygen-rich blood to your organs and other parts of your body. P.A.D. usually affects the arteries in the legs, but it can also affect the arteries that carry blood from your heart to your head, arms, kidneys, and stomach. Blocked blood flow to your legs can cause pain and numbness. It also can raise your risk of getting an infection in the affected limbs. Your body may have a hard time fighting the infection. Why is P.A.D. Dangerous? Over time, the plaque may crack and cause blood clots to form. These blood clots can block arteries, causing pain, numbness, inflammation, and even permanent tissue damage in the affected part of the body. If severe enough, blocked blood flow can cause tissue death (also called gangrene.) In very serious cases, this can lead to leg amputation. P.A.D. currently affects 8 million to 12 million Americans. About 1 in every 20 Americans over the age of 50 has P.A.D. African Americans are more than twice as likely as Caucasians to have P.A.D. If you have P.A.D., your risk of coronary artery disease, heart attack, stroke, and transient ischemic attack ("mini-stroke") is much higher than in people without P.A.D. If you have coronary artery disease, you have a 1 in 3 chance of having blocked leg arteries. Although P.A.D. is serious, it is treatable. If you have the disease, it's important to see your doctor regularly and treat the underlying atherosclerosis. Other Names for Peripheral Arterial Disease -  Atherosclerotic peripheral arterial disease   -  Claudication (klaw-dih-KA-shen)   -  Hardening of the arteries   -  Leg cramps from poor circulation   -  Peripheral vascular disease   -  Poor circulation   -  Vascular disease  Atherosclerotic peripheral arterial disease Claudication (klaw-dih-KA-shen) Hardening of the arteries Leg cramps from poor circulation Peripheral vascular disease Poor circulation Vascular disease
The most common cause of P.A.D. is atherosclerosis, a buildup of plaque in the arteries. Over time, plaque can harden and narrow the arteries. This limits the flow of oxygen-rich blood to your organs and other parts of your body.
Smoking is the main risk factor for P.A.D. Your risk of P.A.D. increases four times if you smoke. Smoking also raises your risk for other diseases, such as coronary heart disease (CHD). On average, smokers who develop P.A.D. have symptoms 10 years earlier than nonsmokers who develop P.A.D. As you get older, your risk for P.A.D. increases, usually starting in your fifties. Older age combined with other risk factors, such as smoking or diabetes, also puts you at higher risk. African American men and women have a greater risk of developing P.A.D. than Caucasians. Your risk for P.A.D. is higher if you have diabetes, high cholesterol, high blood pressure, heart disease, or have had a stroke. A family history of these conditions also makes P.A.D. more likely.
People who have P.A.D. may have symptoms when walking or climbing stairs. These may include pain, numbness, aching, or heaviness in the leg muscles. Symptoms may also include cramping in the affected leg(s) and in the buttocks, thighs, calves, and feet. Some possible signs of P.A.D. include - weak or absent pulses in the legs or feet  - sores or wounds on the toes, feet, or legs that heal slowly  - a pale or bluish color to the skin  - poor nail growth on the toes and decreased hair growth on the legs  - erectile dysfunction, especially among men who have diabetes. weak or absent pulses in the legs or feet sores or wounds on the toes, feet, or legs that heal slowly a pale or bluish color to the skin poor nail growth on the toes and decreased hair growth on the legs erectile dysfunction, especially among men who have diabetes.
Treatment and prevention for P.A.D. often includes making long-lasting lifestyle changes, such as - quitting smoking  - lowering blood pressure  - lowering high blood cholesterol levels  - lowering high blood glucose levels if you have diabetes  - getting regular physical activity  - following a healthy eating plan that's low in total fat, saturated fat, trans fat, cholesterol, and sodium (salt). quitting smoking lowering blood pressure lowering high blood cholesterol levels lowering high blood glucose levels if you have diabetes getting regular physical activity following a healthy eating plan that's low in total fat, saturated fat, trans fat, cholesterol, and sodium (salt). Two examples of healthy eating plans are Therapeutic Lifestyle Changes (TLC) and  Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH).
The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) supports research aimed at learning more about peripheral arterial disease (P.A.D.). For example, NHLBI-supported research on P.A.D. includes studies that - explore whether group walking sessions increase physical activity in people who have P.A.D.  - compare how effective certain exercise programs are at reducing leg pain in people who have P.A.D.  - examine how inflammation and insulin resistance affect people who have P.A.D.  explore whether group walking sessions increase physical activity in people who have P.A.D. compare how effective certain exercise programs are at reducing leg pain in people who have P.A.D. examine how inflammation and insulin resistance affect people who have P.A.D. Much of this research depends on the willingness of volunteers to take part in clinical trials. Clinical trials test new ways to prevent, diagnose, or treat various diseases and conditions. Carefully conducted clinical trials are the fastest and safest way to find treatments that work in people and ways to improve health. For more information about clinical trials related to P.A.D., talk with your doctor. You also can visit the following Web sites to learn more about clinical research and to search for clinical trials. - http://www.nih.gov/health/clinicaltrials/  - http://www.clinicaltrials.gov/  - http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/studies/index.htm  - https://www.researchmatch.org/  - http://www.cleverstudy.org/ http://www.nih.gov/health/clinicaltrials/ http://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/studies/index.htm https://www.researchmatch.org/ http://www.cleverstudy.org/
Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) happens when there is a narrowing of the blood vessels outside of your heart. The cause of PAD is atherosclerosis. This happens when plaque builds up on the walls of the arteries that supply blood to the arms and legs. Plaque is a substance made up of fat and cholesterol. It causes the arteries to narrow or become blocked. This can reduce or stop blood flow, usually to the legs. If severe enough, blocked blood flow can cause tissue death and can sometimes lead to amputation of the foot or leg.    The main risk factor for PAD is smoking. Other risk factors include older age and diseases like diabetes, high blood cholesterol, high blood pressure, heart disease, and stroke.    Many people who have PAD don't have any symptoms. If you have symptoms, they may include       - Pain, numbness, achiness, or heaviness in the leg muscles. This happens when walking or climbing stairs.    - Weak or absent pulses in the legs or feet    - Sores or wounds on the toes, feet, or legs that heal slowly, poorly, or not at all    - A pale or bluish color to the skin    - A lower temperature in one leg than the other leg    - Poor nail growth on the toes and decreased hair growth on the legs    - Erectile dysfunction, especially among men who have diabetes       PAD can increase your risk of heart attack, stroke, and transient ischemic attack.    Doctors diagnose PAD with a physical exam and heart and imaging tests. Treatments include lifestyle changes, medicines, and sometimes surgery. Lifestyle changes include dietary changes, exercise, and efforts to lower high cholesterol levels and high blood pressure.    NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute