Peripheral artery disease (P.A.D.) is a disease in which plaque builds up in the arteries that carry blood to your head, organs, and limbs. Plaque is made up of fat, cholesterol, calcium, fibrous tissue, and other substances in the blood.
                
When plaque builds up in the body's arteries, the condition is called atherosclerosis. Over time, plaque can harden and narrow the arteries. This limits the flow of oxygen-rich blood to your organs and other parts of your body.
                
P.A.D. usually affects the arteries in the legs, but it also can affect the arteries that carry blood from your heart to your head, arms, kidneys, and stomach. This article focuses on P.A.D. that affects blood flow to the legs.
                
Normal Artery and Artery With Plaque Buildup
                

                
Overview
                
Blocked blood flow to your legs can cause pain and numbness. It also can raise your risk of getting an infection in the affected limbs. Your body may have a hard time fighting the infection.
                
If severe enough, blocked blood flow can cause gangrene (tissue death). In very serious cases, this can lead to leg amputation.
                
If you have leg pain when you walk or climb stairs, talk with your doctor. Sometimes older people think that leg pain is just a symptom of aging. However, the cause of the pain could be P.A.D. Tell your doctor if you're feeling pain in your legs and discuss whether you should be tested for P.A.D.
                
Smoking is the main risk factor for P.A.D. If you smoke or have a history of smoking, your risk of P.A.D. increases. Other factors, such as age and having certain diseases or conditions, also increase your risk of P.A.D.
                
Outlook
                
P.A.D. increases your risk of coronary heart disease, heart attack, stroke, and transient ischemic attack("mini-stroke").Although P.A.D. is serious, it's treatable. If you have the disease, see your doctor regularly and treat the underlying atherosclerosis.P.A.D. treatment may slow or stop disease progress and reduce the risk of complications. Treatments include lifestyle changes, medicines, and surgery or procedures. Researchers continue to explore new therapies for P.A.D.
The most common cause of peripheral arterydisease (P.A.D.) is atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis is a disease in which plaque builds up in your arteries. The exact cause of atherosclerosis isn't known.
                
The disease may start if certain factors damage the inner layers of the arteries. These factors include:
                
Smoking
                
High amounts of certain fats and cholesterol in the blood
                
High blood pressure
                
High amounts of sugar in the blood due to insulin resistance or diabetes
                
When damage occurs, your body starts a healing process. The healing may cause plaque to build up where the arteries are damaged.
                
Eventually, a section of plaque can rupture (break open), causing a blood clot to form at the site. The buildup of plaque or blood clots can severely narrow or block the arteries and limit the flow of oxygen-rich blood to your body.
Peripheral artery disease (P.A.D.) affects millions of people in the United States. The disease is more common in blacks than any other racial or ethnic group.The major risk factors for P.A.D. are smoking, older age, and having certain diseases or conditions.
                
Smoking
                
Smoking is the main risk factor for P.A.D. and your risk increases if you smoke or have a history of smoking. Quitting smoking slows the progress of P.A.D. People who smoke and people who have diabetes are at highest risk for P.A.D. complications, such as gangrene (tissue death) in the leg from decreased blood flow.
                
Older Age
                
Older age also is a risk factor for P.A.D. Plaque builds up in your arteries as you age.Older age combined with other risk factors, such as smoking or diabetes, also puts you at higher risk for P.A.D.
                
Diseases and Conditions
                
Many diseases and conditions can raise your risk of P.A.D., including:
                
Diabetes
                
High blood pressure
                
High blood cholesterol
                
Coronary heart disease
                
Stroke
                
Metabolic syndrome
Many people who have peripheral artery disease (P.A.D.) dont have any signs or symptoms.
                
Even if you don't have signs or symptoms, ask your doctor whether you should get checked for P.A.D. if you're:
                
Aged 70 or older
                
Aged 50 or older and have a history of smoking or diabetes
                
Younger than 50 and have diabetes and one or more risk factors for atherosclerosis
                
Intermittent Claudication
                
People who have P.A.D. may have symptoms when walking or climbing stairs, which may include pain, numbness, aching, or heaviness in the leg muscles.Symptoms also may include cramping in the affected leg(s) and in the buttocks, thighs, calves, and feet. Symptoms may ease after resting.These symptoms are called intermittent claudication.
                
During physical activity, your muscles need increased blood flow. If your blood vessels are narrowed or blocked, your muscles won't get enough blood, which will lead to symptoms. When resting, the muscles need less blood flow, so the symptoms will go away.
                
Other Signs and Symptoms
                
Other signs and symptoms of P.A.D. include:
                
Weak or absent pulses in the legs or feet
                
Sores or wounds on the toes, feet, or legs that heal slowly, poorly, or not at all
                
A pale or bluish color to the skin
                
A lower temperature in one leg compared to the other leg
                
Poor nail growth on the toes and decreased hair growth on the legs
                
Erectile dysfunction, especially among men who have diabetes
Taking action to control your risk factors can help prevent or delay peripheral artery disease (P.A.D.) and its complications. Know your family history of health problems related to P.A.D. If you or someone in your family has the disease, be sure to tell your doctor. Controlling risk factors includes the following.
                
Be physically active.
                
Be screened for P.A.D. A simple office test, called an ankle-brachial index or ABI, can help determine whether you have P.A.D.
                
Follow heart-healthy eating.
                
If you smoke, quit. Talk with your doctor about programs and products that can help you quitsmoking.
                
If youre overweight or obese, work with your doctor to create a reasonable weight-loss plan.
                
The lifestyle changes described above can reduce your risk of developing P.A.D. These changes also can help prevent and control conditions that can be associated with P.A.D., such as coronary heart disease, diabetes, high blood pressure, high blood cholesterol, andstroke.