The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Xeroderma pigmentosum type 7. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Ataxia 5% Cataract 5% Growth delay 5% Microcephaly 5% Microphthalmia 5% Pes cavus 5% Spasticity 5% Tremor 5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cutaneous photosensitivity - Defective DNA repair after ultraviolet radiation damage - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Xeroderma pigmentosum is a rare disorder; it is estimated to affect about 1 in 1 million people in the United States and Europe. The condition is more common in Japan, North Africa, and the Middle East.
Xeroderma pigmentosum is caused by mutations in genes that are involved in repairing damaged DNA. DNA can be damaged by UV rays from the sun and by toxic chemicals such as those found in cigarette smoke. Normal cells are usually able to fix DNA damage before it causes problems. However, in people with xeroderma pigmentosum, DNA damage is not repaired normally. As more abnormalities form in DNA, cells malfunction and eventually become cancerous or die.  Many of the genes related to xeroderma pigmentosum are part of a DNA-repair process known as nucleotide excision repair (NER). The proteins produced from these genes play a variety of roles in this process. They recognize DNA damage, unwind regions of DNA where the damage has occurred, snip out (excise) the abnormal sections, and replace the damaged areas with the correct DNA. Inherited abnormalities in the NER-related genes prevent cells from carrying out one or more of these steps. The POLH gene also plays a role in protecting cells from UV-induced DNA damage, although it is not involved in NER; mutations in this gene cause the variant type of xeroderma pigmentosum.  The major features of xeroderma pigmentosum result from a buildup of unrepaired DNA damage. When UV rays damage genes that control cell growth and division, cells can either die or grow too fast and in an uncontrolled way. Unregulated cell growth can lead to the development of cancerous tumors. Neurological abnormalities are also thought to result from an accumulation of DNA damage, although the brain is not exposed to UV rays. Researchers suspect that other factors damage DNA in nerve cells. It is unclear why some people with xeroderma pigmentosum develop neurological abnormalities and others do not.  Inherited mutations in at least eight genes have been found to cause xeroderma pigmentosum. More than half of all cases in the United States result from mutations in the XPC, ERCC2, or POLH genes. Mutations in the other genes generally account for a smaller percentage of cases.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of xeroderma pigmentosum:  - American Cancer Society: How are Squamous and Basal Cell Skin Cancer Diagnosed?  - American Cancer Society: How is Melanoma Diagnosed?  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Xeroderma Pigmentosum  - Genetic Testing Registry: Xeroderma pigmentosum  - Genetic Testing Registry: Xeroderma pigmentosum, complementation group b  - Genetic Testing Registry: Xeroderma pigmentosum, group C  - Genetic Testing Registry: Xeroderma pigmentosum, group D  - Genetic Testing Registry: Xeroderma pigmentosum, group E  - Genetic Testing Registry: Xeroderma pigmentosum, group F  - Genetic Testing Registry: Xeroderma pigmentosum, group G  - Genetic Testing Registry: Xeroderma pigmentosum, type 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Xeroderma pigmentosum, variant type  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Xeroderma Pigmentosum  - National Cancer Institute: Melanoma Treatment  - National Cancer Institute: Skin Cancer Treatment  - Xeroderma Pigmentosum Society, Inc.: Beta Carotene  - Xeroderma Pigmentosum Society, Inc.: Ultraviolet Radiation and Protection   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care