Pityriasis rubra pilaris (PRP) refers to a group of skin conditions that cause constant inflammation and scaling of the skin. Affected people have reddish-orange colored patches; they may occur everywhere on the body or only on certain areas. There are several types of PRP, which are classified based on age of onset, body areas affected, and whether other associated conditions are present. PRP is usually sporadic (occurring randomly) but some forms may be inherited.
 Features of this condition vary greatly between affected individuals. The onset is gradual in the familial type and can be more rapid in the acquired type. Redness and scaling of the face and scalp are often seen first, followed by redness and thickening of the palms and soles. Overall, the elbows, knees, backs of the hands and feet, and ankles are most commonly affected. A more widespread eruption consisting of scaling orange-red plaques can be observed on the trunk and extremities. The lesions may expand and coalesce and eventually cover the entire body. When the disease becomes widespread, the nails, mucous membranes and eyes may be affected. The familial type often persists throughout life, but the acquired form may have periods of remission (periods of time where symptoms improve or completely resolve). The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Pityriasis rubra pilaris. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Irregular hyperpigmentation 90% Palmoplantar keratoderma 90% Abnormality of the fingernails 50% Pruritus 50% Abnormality of the oral cavity 7.5% Eczema 7.5% Ichthyosis 7.5% Lichenification 7.5% Neoplasm 7.5% Pustule 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Subungual hyperkeratosis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 In most cases, pityriasis rubra pilaris (PRP) occurs sporadically for unknown reasons. In a few families with the inherited form, familial PRP, the condition is caused by mutations in the CARD14 gene. This gene gives instructions for making a protein that turns on other proteins that regulate genes that control the body's immune responses and inflammatory reactions. It also protects cells from certain signals that would otherwise cause them to self-destruct. The CARD14 protein is particularly abundant in the skin. Mutations in the gene can cause a person to have an abnormal inflammatory response. Researchers are trying to find out how these mutations cause the specific features of familial PRP.
 Treatment of pityriasis rubra pilaris (PRP) is mainly based on reports of patients' experiences. No controlled trials have been done, so the effectiveness and safety of treatments is unclear. Currently there are no treatments approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) or the European Medicines Agency (EMA) for use in PRP. Management of PRP often involves systemic and topical therapies combined. Topical therapies can help with the symptoms and may be enough for people with mild PRP. Topical treatments are usually combined with systemic therapy for PRP that affects a large part of the body. Most people need systemic therapy to control the condition. Oral retinoids (synthetic vitamin A derivatives) are usually preferred as a first-line systemic treatment for PRP. Methotrexate may be an alternative option for people who should not use systemic retinoids, or who don't respond to systemic retinoid therapy. For people who don't respond well to retinoid or methotrexate therapy, options may include biologic TNF-alpha inhibitors, azathioprine, cyclosporine, and/or phototherapy. Topical treatments used for PRP may include topical corticosteroids, keratolytics, tar, calcipotriol, topical tretinoin, and tazarotene. Some of the medications used to treat PRP can harm a developing fetus and are not recommended for use right before or during pregnancy. People seeking information about specific treatment options for themselves or family members should speak with their health care provider.
Familial pityriasis rubra pilaris is a rare genetic condition that affects the skin. The name of the condition reflects its major features: The term "pityriasis" refers to scaling; "rubra" means redness; and "pilaris" suggests the involvement of hair follicles in this disorder. Affected individuals have a salmon-colored skin rash covered in fine scales. This rash occurs in patches all over the body, with distinct areas of unaffected skin between the patches. Affected individuals also develop bumps called follicular keratoses that occur around hair follicles. The skin on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet often becomes thick, hard, and callused, a condition known as palmoplantar keratoderma.  Researchers have distinguished six types of pityriasis rubra pilaris based on the features of the disorder and the age at which signs and symptoms appear. The familial form is usually considered part of type V, which is also known as the atypical juvenile type. People with familial pityriasis rubra pilaris typically have skin abnormalities from birth or early childhood, and these skin problems persist throughout life.
Familial pityriasis rubra pilaris is a rare condition. Its incidence is unknown, although the familial form appears to be the least common type of pityriasis rubra pilaris.
In most cases of pityriasis rubra pilaris, the cause of the condition is unknown. However, mutations in the CARD14 gene have been found to cause the familial form of the disorder in a few affected families. The CARD14 gene provides instructions for making a protein that turns on (activates) a group of interacting proteins known as nuclear factor-kappa-B (NF-B). NF-B regulates the activity of multiple genes, including genes that control the body's immune responses and inflammatory reactions. It also protects cells from certain signals that would otherwise cause them to self-destruct (undergo apoptosis).  The CARD14 protein is found in many of the body's tissues, but it is particularly abundant in the skin. NF-B signaling appears to play an important role in regulating inflammation in the skin. Mutations in the CARD14 gene lead to overactivation of NF-B signaling, which triggers an abnormal inflammatory response. Researchers are working to determine how these changes lead to the specific features of familial pityriasis rubra pilaris.
Familial pityriasis rubra pilaris usually has an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Affected individuals usually inherit the condition from one affected parent. However, the condition is said to have incomplete penetrance because not everyone who inherits the altered gene from a parent develops the condition's characteristic skin abnormalities.  The other types of pityriasis rubra pilaris are sporadic, which means they occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of familial pityriasis rubra pilaris:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Pityriasis rubra pilaris   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care