Peters plus syndrome is a genetic condition characterized by abnormalities of the front part of the eye called the anterior chamber, short stature, cleft lip with or without cleft palate, and distinctive facial features.  The most common eye abnormality is Peters anomaly which involves the thinning and clouding of the cornea and attachment of the iris to the cornea causing blurred vision. Other eye abnormalities such as glaucoma and cataracts are common. The severity of symptoms may vary from person to person. The only gene that has been associated with Peters plus syndrome is B3GALTL. The syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion. Treatment varies based on the severity of the symptoms; however, regular appointments with an ophthalmologist and avoidance of agents that increase the risk of glaucoma (e.g., corticosteroids) is recommended.
 No. Peters plus syndrome is genetic; therefore, there is nothing you or your partner could have done to cause or to prevent the syndrome.
How  Peters plus syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion, which means that an individual needs to inherit two disease-causing mutations of the B3GALTL gene-one from each parent-in order to have symptoms of the condition. Parents of individuals with the condition typically do not show signs and symptoms of Peters plus syndrome.
 Genetic testing is available for Peters plus syndrome. Click here to obtain a list of clinical laboratories offering genetic testing. Carrier testing for at-risk family members and prenatal diagnosis for pregnancies at increased risk are possible if the disease-causing mutations in the family are known. To learn more about the various options available to you, we recommend you work with your health care provider or a genetics professional to contact the laboratories offering prenatal testing.
 Treatment varies from person to person and is based on the extent of the disease. Once a person has been diagnosed with Peters plus syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended : Eye examination Growth hormone testing Developmental assessment Heart examination Kidney examination Head examination Thyroid testing Hearing assessment Assessment by a ophthalmologist every three months or as indicated is recommended as well as regular developmental assessments. Agents, like corticosteroids, should be avoided, as they increase the risk of glaucoma.
Peters plus syndrome is a rare disorder; its incidence is unknown. Fewer than 80 people with this condition have been reported worldwide.
Mutations in the B3GLCT gene cause Peters plus syndrome. The B3GLCT gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called beta 3-glucosyltransferase (B3Glc-T), which is involved in the complex process of adding sugar molecules to proteins (glycosylation). Glycosylation modifies proteins so they can perform a wider variety of functions. Most mutations in the B3GLCT gene lead to the production of an abnormally short, nonfunctional version of the B3Glc-T enzyme, which disrupts glycosylation. It is unclear how the loss of functional B3Glc-T enzyme leads to the signs and symptoms of Peters plus syndrome, but impaired glycosylation likely disrupts the function of many proteins, which may contribute to the variety of features.