Repeatedly breathing in foreign substances can cause hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP). Examples of these substances include molds, dusts, and chemicals. (Mold often is the cause of HP.) These substances also are known as antigens.
                
Over time, your lungs can become sensitive to antigens. If this happens, your lungs will become inflamed, which can lead to symptoms and may even cause long-term lung damage.
                
Antigens may be found in the home, workplace, or in other settings. Antigens can come from many sources, such as:
                
Bird droppings
                
Humidifiers, heating systems, and hot tubs
                
Liquid chemicals used in the landscaping and florist industries
                
Moldy hay, straw, and grain
                
Chemicals released during the production of plastics and electronics, and chemicals released during painting
                
Mold released during lumber milling, construction, and wood stripping
People who repeatedly breathe in foreign substances are at risk for hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP). These substances, which also are known as antigens, include molds, dusts, and chemicals. However, most people who breathe in these substances don't develop HP.
                
People at increased risk include:
                
Farm and dairy cattle workers
                
People who use hot tubs often
                
People who are exposed to molds or dusts from humidifiers, heating systems, or wet carpeting
                
Bird fanciers (people who keep pet birds) and poultry handlers
                
Florists and landscapers, especially those who use liquid chemicals on lawns and gardens
                
People who work in grain and flour processing and loading
                
Lumber milling, construction, wood stripping, and paper and wallboard workers
                
People who make plastics or electronics, and those who paint or work with other chemicals
Signs and symptoms of hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) depend on whether the disease is acute (short-term) or chronic (ongoing).
                
Acute Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis
                
With acute HP, symptoms usually occur within 29 hours of exposure to an antigen you're sensitive to. (An antigen is a substance that your body reacts against, such as molds, dusts, and chemicals.)
                
Acute HP can cause chills, body aches, coughing, and chest tightness. After hours or days of no contact with the antigen, symptoms usually go away.
                
Chronic Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis
                
If acute HP isn't found and treated early, chronic HP may develop. With chronic HP, symptoms occur slowly, over months. Chronic HP can cause a worsening cough, shortness of breath with physical activity, fatigue (tiredness), and weight loss.
                
Some symptoms may continue and/or worsen, even after avoiding the antigen. Chronic HP can cause long-term lung damage, such as pulmonary fibrosis. This is a condition in which tissue deep in your lungs becomes scarred over time.
                
Clubbing also may occur if HP is severe. Clubbing is the widening and rounding of the tips of the fingers or toes. A low level of oxygen in the blood causes this condition.