Pol III-related leukodystrophy is a rare disorder; its prevalence is unknown. Only about 40 cases have been described in the medical literature. However, researchers believe that a significant percentage of people with an unspecified hypomyelinating leukodystrophy could have Pol III-related leukodystrophy.
Pol III-related leukodystrophy is caused by mutations in the POLR3A or POLR3B gene. These genes provide instructions for making the two largest parts (subunits) of an enzyme called RNA polymerase III. This enzyme is involved in the production (synthesis) of ribonucleic acid (RNA), a chemical cousin of DNA. The RNA polymerase III enzyme attaches (binds) to DNA and synthesizes RNA in accordance with the instructions carried by the DNA, a process called transcription. RNA polymerase III helps synthesize several forms of RNA, including ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and transfer RNA (tRNA). Molecules of rRNA and tRNA assemble protein building blocks (amino acids) into working proteins; this process is essential for the normal functioning and survival of cells.  Researchers suggest that mutations in the POLR3A or POLR3B gene may impair the ability of subunits of the RNA polymerase III enzyme to assemble properly or result in an RNA polymerase III with impaired ability to bind to DNA. Reduced function of the RNA polymerase III molecule likely affects development and function of many parts of the body, including the nervous system and the teeth, but the relationship between POLR3A and POLR3B gene mutations and the specific signs and symptoms of Pol III-related leukodystrophy is unknown.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Pol III-related leukodystrophy:  - Eastman Dental Hospital: Hypodontia Clinic  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Pol III-Related Leukodystrophies  - Genetic Testing Registry: Pol III-related leukodystrophy  - Johns Hopkins Medicine: Treating Ataxia  - National Ataxia Foundation: Diagnosis of Ataxia  - UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital: Hypodontia  - University of Chicago Ataxia Center   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care