Poland syndrome is characterized by an underdeveloped or absent chest muscle on one side of the body, absence of the breastbone portion (sternal) of the chest muscle, and webbing of the fingers of the hand on the same side. The cause of Poland syndrome is not known. This syndrome is nearly always sporadic. It tends to occur on the right side and is more common in boys than girls. Treatment typically involves surgical correction of the chest wall deformities.
 The cause of Poland syndrome is unknown. Most evidence supports the idea that something abnormal happens during the sixth week of fetal development. This event most likely involves the vascular (blood and lymph) system. Speculations include: An interruption of the embryonic blood supply of the arteries that lie under the collarbone (subclavian arteries). This could be caused by the forward growth of the ribs reducing the flow of blood. A malformation of the subclavian arteries causes a reduced amount of blood delivered to the developing tissues on one side of the body.
 Poland syndrome is rarely inherited and generally sporadic. Sporadic refers to the chance occurrence of a non-genetic disorder or abnormality that is not likely to recur in a family. In the few reported familial cases, researchers suggest that the condition may have stemmed from an inherited susceptibility to events such as interruption of blood flow that may predispose a person to the anomaly (i.e., make a person more likely to develop the anomaly).
 The severity of Poland syndrome differs from person to person. As a result it is not often diagnosed or reported. Sometimes, a person does not realize they have the condition until puberty, when lopsided (asymmetrical) growth makes it more obvious.
 Management of Poland syndrome may include surgical correction of the chest wall deformities. Surgical options are available to improve appearance in both males and females. In females, breast reconstruction is typically performed at the time of normal full breast development and can be planned in conjunction with or following reconstruction of the chest wall. In males reconstruction of the chest may not be necessary if there is no underlying chest wall deformity. The optimal surgical approach will vary from patient to patient. Surgical options should be discussed with a surgeon familiar with reconstructive surgery in people with Poland syndrome.
Poland syndrome has been estimated to occur in 1 in 20,000 newborns. For unknown reasons, this disorder occurs more than twice as often in males than in females. Poland syndrome may be underdiagnosed because mild cases without hand involvement may never come to medical attention.
The cause of Poland syndrome is unknown. Researchers have suggested that it may result from a disruption of blood flow during development before birth. This disruption is thought to occur at about the sixth week of embryonic development and affect blood vessels that will become the subclavian and vertebral arteries on each side of the body. The arteries normally supply blood to embryonic tissues that give rise to the chest wall and hand on their respective sides. Variations in the site and extent of the disruption may explain the range of signs and symptoms that occur in Poland syndrome. Abnormality of an embryonic structure called the apical ectodermal ridge, which helps direct early limb development, may also be involved in this disorder.  Rare cases of Poland syndrome are thought to be caused by a genetic change that can be passed down in families, but no related genes have been identified.