Polymyositis is a type of inflammatory myopathy, which refers to a group of muscle diseases characterized by chronic muscle inflammation and weakness. It involves skeletal muscles (those involved with making movement) on both sides of the body. Although it can affect people of all ages, most cases are seen in adults between the ages of 31 and 60. The exact cause of polymyositis is unknown; however, the disease shares many characteristics with autoimmune disorders which occur when the immune system mistakenly attacks healthy body tissues. It some cases, the condition may be associated with viral infections, malignancies, or connective tissue disorders. Although there is no cure for polymyositis, treatment can improve muscle strength and function.
 Polymyositis is characterized by chronic muscle inflammation and weakness involving the skeletal muscles (those involved with making movement) on both sides of the body. Weakness generally starts in the proximal muscles which can eventually cause difficulties climbing stairs, rising from a sitting position, lifting objects, or reaching overhead. In some cases, distal muscles may also be affected as the disease progresses. Other symptoms may include arthritis; shortness of breath; difficulty swallowing and speaking; mild joint or muscle tenderness; fatigue, and heart arrhythmias.
 A diagnosis of polymyositis is often suspected in people with proximal muscle weakness and other associated signs and symptoms. Additional testing can then be ordered to confirm the diagnosis and rule out other conditions that may cause similar features. This testing may include: Blood tests to measure the levels of certain muscle enzymes (i.e. creatine kinase and aldolase) and detect specific autoantibodies associated with different symptoms of polymyositis Electromyography to check the health of the muscles and the nerves that control them Imaging studies such as an MRI scan to detect muscle inflammation A muscle biopsy to diagnose muscle abnormalities such as inflammation, damage and/or infection Medscape Reference's Web site offers more specific information regarding the treatment and management of polymyositis. Please click on the link to access this resource.
 The treatment of polymyositis is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person. Although there is currently no cure, symptoms of the condition may be managed with the following: Medications such as corticosteroids, corticosteroid-sparing agents, immunosuppressive drugs Physical therapy to improve muscle strength and flexibility Speech therapy to address difficulties with swallowing and speech Intravenous immunoglobulin (healthy antibodies are given to block damaging autoantibodies that attack muscle) Medscape Reference's Web site offers more specific information regarding the treatment and management of polymyositis. Please click on the link to access the resource.
The prognosis for polymyositis varies. Most people respond fairly well to therapy, but some have a more severe disease that does not respond adequately to therapies and are left with significant disability. In rare cases individuals with severe and progressive muscle weakness will develop respiratory failure or pneumonia. Difficulty swallowing may cause weight loss and malnutrition.
The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) and other institutes of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) conduct research relating to polymyositis in laboratories at the NIH and support additional research through grants to major medical institutions across the country. Currently funded research is exploring patterns of gene expression among the inflammatory myopathies, the role of viral infection as a precursor to the disorders, and the safety and efficacy of various treatment regimens.