Bilateral frontal polymicrogyria is one of the rarest subtypes of polymicrogyria. It is a symmetric and bilateral form (in both brain hemispheres) that only involves the frontal lobes without including the area located behind the Sylvius fissure or the area located behind the Rolando sulcus. Some researchers classify the condition into two different forms: bilateral frontal polymicrogyria and the bilateral frontoparietal. Signs and symptoms included delayed motor and language milestones; spastic (stiffness) hemiparesis (weakness in one side of the body) or quadriparesis (weakness in all four limbs of the body); and mild to moderate intellectual disability. Seizures may also be present. The frontoparietal form is caused by changes (mutations) in the GPR56 gene but the cause for the frontal form of polymicrogyira is still not known. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
Bilateral generalized polymicrogyria is a rare neurological disorder that affects the cerebral cortex (the outer surface of the brain). This is the most widespread form of polymicrogyria and typically affects the entire surface of the brain. Signs and symptoms include severe intellectual disability, problems with movement, and seizures that are difficult or impossible to treat. While the exact cause of bilateral generalized polymicrogyria is not fully understood, it is thought to be due to improper brain development during embryonic growth. Most cases appear to follow an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
Bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria (BFPP) is a rare neurological disorder that affects the cerebral cortex (the outer surface of the brain). BFPP specifically affects the frontal and parietal lobes on both sides of the brain (bilateral). Signs and symptoms typically include moderate to severe intellectual disability, developmental delay, seizures, cerebellar ataxia, strabismus, and dysconjugate gaze (eyes that are not aligned). Some cases are caused by mutations in the GPR56 gene and are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
The signs and symptoms of bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria vary but may include: Moderate to severe intellectual disability Developmental delay Seizures Dysconjugate gaze (eyes that are not aligned) Ataxia Strabismus Increased muscle tone Finger dysmetria (difficulty controlling speed, distance and/or power of movements) The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Ankle clonus - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Babinski sign - Broad-based gait - Cerebellar hypoplasia - Cerebral dysmyelination - Esotropia - Exotropia - Frontoparietal polymicrogyria - Hyperreflexia - Hypertonia - Hypoplasia of the brainstem - Intellectual disability - Nystagmus - Polymicrogyria, anterior to posterior gradient - Seizures - Truncal ataxia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Bilateral perisylvian polymicrogyria (BPP) is a rare neurological disorder that affects the cerebral cortex (the outer surface of the brain). Signs and symptoms include partial paralysis of muscles on both sides of the face, tongue, jaws, and throat; difficulties in speaking, chewing, and swallowing; and/or seizures. In most cases, mild to severe intellectual disability is also present. While the exact cause of BPP is not fully understood, it is thought to be due to improper brain development during embryonic growth. Most cases of BPP occur sporadically in people with no family history of the disorder; however, more than one family member may rarely be affected by the condition. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
The signs and symptoms of bilateral perisylvian polymicrogyria (BPP) vary but may include: Partial paralysis of muscles on both sides of the face, tongue, jaws, and throat  Dysarthria Difficulty chewing Dysphagia Mild to severe intellectual disability Seizures and/or epilepsy Sudden, involuntary spasms of facial muscles Developmental delay The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Bilateral perisylvian polymicrogyria. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Atypical absence seizures - Cognitive impairment - Delayed speech and language development - Dyslexia - Generalized tonic-clonic seizures - Polymicrogyria - Pseudobulbar paralysis - X-linked dominant inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The exact underlying cause of bilateral perisylvian polymicrogyria (BPP) is unknown. The signs and symptoms associated with the condition are thought to be due to improper development of the outer surface of the brain (cerebral cortex) during embryonic growth. The cerebral cortex, which is responsible for conscious movement and thought, normally consists of several deep folds (gyri) and grooves (sulci). However, in people affected by BPP, the cerebral cortex has an abnormally increased number of gyri that are unusually small. Scientists believe that these abnormalities occur when newly developed brain cells fail to migrate to their destined locations in the outer portion of the brain. Specific non-genetic causes of polymicrogyria have been recognized, including exposure to cytomegalovirus infection (CMV) during pregnancy. Polymicrogyria has also been associated with certain complications in twin pregnancies.
 In most cases, bilateral perisylvian polymicrogyria (BPP) occurs sporadically in people with no family history of the condition. Rarely, more than one family member may be affected by BPP. These cases may follow an autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-linked pattern of inheritance.
 Genetic testing is not available for bilateral perisylvian polymicrogyria because the underlying genetic cause is unknown. How is bilateral perisylvian polymicrogyria diagnosed? A diagnosis of bilateral perisylvian polymicrogyria (BPP) is typically based on a thorough physical examination, a detailed medical history and a complete neurological evaluation, which many include the following tests: Electroencephalography (EEG) Computed tomography (CT) scanning Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
 There is no cure for bilateral perisylvian polymicrogyria (BPP). Treatment is generally based on the signs and symptoms present in each person. For example, medications may be prescribed to treat seizures and/or epilepsy. People affected by BPP may also benefit from physical therapy, occupational therapy and/or speech therapy. Please speak with a healthcare provider for more specific information regarding personal medical management.