Polycystic liver disease is an inherited condition characterized by many cysts of various sizes scattered throughout the liver. Abdominal discomfort from swelling of the liver may occur; however, most affected individuals do not have any symptoms. In some cases, polycystic liver disease appears to occur randomly, with no apparent cause. Most cases are inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. Sometimes, cysts are found in the liver in association with the presence of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (AD-PKD). In fact, about half of the people who have AD-PKD experience liver cysts. However, kidney cysts are uncommon in those affected by polycystic liver disease.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Polycystic liver disease. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Hepatomegaly 90% Polycystic kidney dysplasia 50% Abdominal pain 7.5% Abnormality of the pancreas 7.5% Aneurysm 7.5% Elevated alkaline phosphatase 7.5% Feeding difficulties in infancy 7.5% Gastrointestinal hemorrhage 7.5% Respiratory insufficiency 7.5% Abdominal distention - Abnormality of the cardiovascular system - Abnormality of the nervous system - Ascites - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Back pain - Increased total bilirubin - Polycystic liver disease - Renal cyst - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) is a genetic condition that is characterized by the growth of cysts in the kidneys (which lead to kidney failure) and liver and problems in other organs, such as the blood vessels in the brain and heart. The severity varies from person to person. The signs of ARPKD frequently begin before birth, so it is often called infantile PKD but some people do not develop symptoms until later in childhood or even adulthood. Children born with ARPKD often, but not always, develop kidney failure before reaching adulthood; babies with the worst cases die hours or days after birth due to respiratory difficulties or respiratory failure. Liver scarring occurs in all patients. The condition is caused by a mutation in the PKHD1 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Some symptoms of the condition may be controlled by medicines, antibiotics, healthy diet, and growth hormones.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Congenital hepatic fibrosis 90% Depressed nasal ridge 90% Hypoplasia of the ear cartilage 90% Low-set, posteriorly rotated ears 90% Macrotia 90% Polycystic kidney dysplasia 90% Renal insufficiency 90% Respiratory insufficiency 90% Abnormality of the pancreas 50% Biliary tract abnormality 50% Cystic liver disease 50% Renal hypoplasia/aplasia 50% Neonatal death 5% Absence of renal corticomedullary differentiation - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Dehydration - Enlarged kidneys - Esophageal varix - Hepatic cysts - Hepatomegaly - Oligohydramnios - Pancreatic cysts - Periportal fibrosis - Portal hypertension - Potter facies - Pulmonary hypoplasia - Renal cyst - Splenomegaly - Tubulointerstitial fibrosis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
How  Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that an affected individual has two gene alterations (mutations) in the PKHD1 gene, with one mutation inherited from each parent. Each parent, who has one altered copy of the gene, is referred to as a carrier. Carriers do not typically show signs and symptoms of the condition. When two carriers for an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be an unaffected carrier like each of the parents, and a 25% chance to not have the condition and not be a carrier. This means that with each pregnancy, there is a 75% (3 in 4) chance to have an unaffected child.
 Although a cure or treatment for the underlying genetic cause of autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease does not exist, advancements have been made in showing improvement of liver and kidney disease in mouse models of the condition by disrupting the function of certain cell receptors. Medical management is currently symptomatic and involves supportive care. Mechanical ventilation may be used to treat the underdevelopment of the lungs and breathing issues caused by the kidneys that are enlarged due to the numerous cysts. When the kidneys are severely enlarged, one or both kidneys may be removed (nephrectomy). Dialysis may be required during the first days of life if the infant is producing little urine (oliguria) or no urine (anuria). Low levels of sodium (hyponatremia) may occur and is treated with diuresis and/or sodium supplementation depending on the individual's specific levels. High blood pressure (hypertension) is treated with medication. Kidney failure requires dialysis, and kidney transplantation is another option. Poor eating and growth failure may be managed with gastrostomy tubes. Growth hormone therapy may be used to treat the growth failure and kidney insufficiency. Urinary tract infections are treated with antibiotics. Those with liver involvement may require shunt to treat the progressive high blood pressure and possibly liver transplantation.
Polycystic kidney disease refers to a group of inherited kidney disorders characterized by the presence of multiple cysts in both kidneys. Normal kidney tissue is replaced by fluid-filled sacs that interfere with the their ability to filter waste products from the blood. The growth of cysts causes the kidneys to become enlarged and can lead to kidney failure. Cysts may also develop in other organs, particularly the liver. However, signs and symptom severity can vary greatly from person to person. Treatment is tailored to the individual based upon their signs and symptoms. The two major forms of polycystic kidney disease are distinguished by the usual age of onset and their pattern of inheritance: (1) Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the most common form that usually causes symptoms between the ages of 30 and 40; but they can begin earlier, even in childhood. ADPKD can be further divided into type 1 and type 2, depending on the underlying genetic cause. (2) Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) is a rare form that usually causes symptoms in infancy and early childhood and is often lethal early in life. Some people with ARPKD do not develop symptoms until later in childhood or even adulthood.
Polycystic kidney disease is a disorder that affects the kidneys and other organs. Clusters of fluid-filled sacs, called cysts, develop in the kidneys and interfere with their ability to filter waste products from the blood. The growth of cysts causes the kidneys to become enlarged and can lead to kidney failure. Cysts may also develop in other organs, particularly the liver.  Frequent complications of polycystic kidney disease include dangerously high blood pressure (hypertension), pain in the back or sides, blood in the urine (hematuria), recurrent urinary tract infections, kidney stones, and heart valve abnormalities. Additionally, people with polycystic kidney disease have an increased risk of an abnormal bulging (an aneurysm) in a large blood vessel called the aorta or in blood vessels at the base of the brain. Aneurysms can be life-threatening if they tear or rupture.  The two major forms of polycystic kidney disease are distinguished by the usual age of onset and the pattern in which it is passed through families. The autosomal dominant form (sometimes called ADPKD) has signs and symptoms that typically begin in adulthood, although cysts in the kidney are often present from birth or childhood. Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease can be further divided into type 1 and type 2, depending on the genetic cause. The autosomal recessive form of polycystic kidney disease (sometimes called ARPKD) is much rarer and is often lethal early in life. The signs and symptoms of this condition are usually apparent at birth or in early infancy.
Polycystic kidney disease is a fairly common genetic disorder. It affects about 500,000 people in the United States. The autosomal dominant form of the disease is much more common than the autosomal recessive form. Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease affects 1 in 500 to 1,000 people, while the autosomal recessive type occurs in an estimated 1 in 20,000 to 40,000 people.
Mutations in the PKD1, PKD2, and PKHD1 genes cause polycystic kidney disease.  Mutations in either the PKD1 or PKD2 gene can cause autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease; PKD1 gene mutations cause ADPKD type 1, and PKD2 gene mutations cause ADPKD type 2. These genes provide instructions for making proteins whose functions are not fully understood. Researchers believe that they are involved in transmitting chemical signals from outside the cell to the cell's nucleus. The two proteins work together to promote normal kidney development, organization, and function. Mutations in the PKD1 or PKD2 gene lead to the formation of thousands of cysts, which disrupt the normal functions of the kidneys and other organs. People with mutations in the PKD2 gene, particularly women, typically have a less severe form of the disease than people with PKD1 mutations. The signs and symptoms, including a decline in kidney function, tend to appear later in adulthood in people with a PKD2 mutation.  Mutations in the PKHD1 gene cause autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease. This gene provides instructions for making a protein whose exact function is unknown; however, the protein likely transmits chemical signals from outside the cell to the cell nucleus. Researchers have not determined how mutations in the PKHD1 gene lead to the formation of numerous cysts characteristic of polycystic kidney disease.  Although polycystic kidney disease is usually a genetic disorder, a small percentage of cases are not caused by gene mutations. These cases are called acquired polycystic kidney disease. This form of the disorder occurs most often in people with other types of kidney disease who have been treated for several years with hemodialysis (a procedure that filters waste products from the blood).
Most cases of polycystic kidney disease have an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. People with this condition are born with one mutated copy of the PKD1 or PKD2 gene in each cell. In about 90 percent of these cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. The other 10 percent of cases result from a new mutation in one of the genes and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.  Although one altered copy of a gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder, an additional mutation in the second copy of the PKD1 or PKD2 gene may make cysts grow faster and increase the severity of the disease. The rate at which cysts enlarge and cause a loss of kidney function varies widely, and may be influenced by mutations in other genes that have not been identified.  Polycystic kidney disease also can be inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. People with this form of the condition have two altered copies of the PKHD1 gene in each cell. The parents of a child with an autosomal recessive disorder are not affected but are carriers of one copy of the altered gene.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of polycystic kidney disease:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Polycystic Kidney Disease, Autosomal Dominant  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Polycystic Kidney Disease, Autosomal Recessive  - Genetic Testing Registry: Polycystic kidney disease 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Polycystic kidney disease 3, autosomal dominant  - Genetic Testing Registry: Polycystic kidney disease, adult type  - Genetic Testing Registry: Polycystic kidney disease, infantile type  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Polycystic kidney disease   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Polycystic kidney disease is a genetic disorder that causes numerous cysts to grow in the kidneys. A kidney cyst is an abnormal sac filled with fluid. PKD cysts can greatly enlarge the kidneys while replacing much of their normal structure, resulting in chronic kidney disease (CKD), which causes reduced kidney function over time. CKD may lead to kidney failure, described as end-stage kidney disease or ESRD when treated with a kidney transplant or blood-filtering treatments called dialysis. The two main types of PKD are autosomal dominant PKD and autosomal recessive PKD.
                
PKD cysts are different from the usually harmless simple cysts that often form in the kidneys later in life. PKD cysts are more numerous and cause complications, such as high blood pressure, cysts in the liver, and problems with blood vessels in the brain and heart.
A gene mutation, or defect, causes polycystic kidney disease. Genes provide instructions for making proteins in the body. A gene mutation is a permanent change in the deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequence that makes up a gene. In most cases of PKD, a person inherits the gene mutation, meaning a parent passes it on in his or her genes. In the remaining cases, the gene mutation develops spontaneously. In spontaneous cases, neither parent carries a copy of the mutated gene.
                
Researchers have found three different gene mutations associated with PKD. Two of the genes are associated with autosomal dominant PKD. The third gene is associated with autosomal recessive PKD. Gene mutations that cause PKD affect proteins that play a role in kidney development.
                

                
Genetic Disorders   Each cell contains thousands of genes that provide the instructions for making proteins for growth and repair of the body. If a gene has a mutation, the protein made by that gene may not function properly, which sometimes creates a genetic disorder. Not all gene mutations cause a disorder.   People inherit two copies of most genes; one copy from each parent. A genetic disorder occurs when one or both parents pass a mutated gene to a child at conception. A genetic disorder can also occur through a spontaneous gene mutation, meaning neither parent carries a copy of the mutated gene. Once a spontaneous gene mutation has occurred, a person can pass it to his or her children.   Read more about genes and genetic conditions in the U.S. National Library of Medicines (NLMs) Genetics Home Reference.
Estimates of PKDs prevalence range from one in 400 to one in 1,000 people.1 According to the United States Renal Data System, PKD accounts for 2.2 percent of new cases of kidney failure each year in the United States. Annually, eight people per 1 million have kidney failure as a result of PKD.2
                
Polycystic kidney disease exists around the world and in all races. The disorder occurs equally in women and men, although men are more likely to develop kidney failure from PKD. Women with PKD and high blood pressure who have had more than three pregnancies also have an increased chance of developing kidney failure.
In many cases, PKD does not cause signs or symptoms until cysts are half an inch or larger. When present, the most common symptoms are pain in the back and sidesbetween the ribs and hipsand headaches. The pain can be temporary or persistent, mild or severe. Hematuriablood in the urinemay also be a sign of autosomal dominant PKD.
Babies with the most severe cases of autosomal recessive PKD often die hours or days after birth because they cannot breathe well enough to sustain life. Their lungs do not develop as they should during the prenatal period. Pressure from enlarged kidneys also contributes to breathing problems.
                
Children born with autosomal recessive PKD often develop kidney failure before reaching adulthood.
                
Liver scarring occurs in all people with autosomal recessive PKD and is usually present at birth. However, liver problems tend to become more of a concern as people with autosomal recessive PKD grow older. Liver scarring can lead to progressive liver dysfunction and other problems.
                
Additional complications of autosomal recessive PKD include high blood pressure and UTIs.
Scientists have not yet found a way to prevent PKD. However, people with PKD may slow the progression of kidney damage caused by high blood pressure through lifestyle changes, diet, and blood pressure medications. People with PKD should be physically active 30 minutes a day most days of the week. See Eating, Diet, and Nutrition for diet advice on lowering blood pressure and slowing the progression of kidney disease in general. If lifestyle and diet changes do not control a persons blood pressure, a health care provider may prescribe one or more blood pressure medications, including ACE inhibitors or ARBs.