Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 2 (PCH2) is a rare condition that affects the development of the brain. Signs and symptoms vary but may include microcephaly, developmental delay with lack of voluntary motor development, intellectual disability and movement disorders (i.e. chorea, dystonia, and spasticity). Affected people may also experience dysphagia (difficulty swallowing), impaired vision, seizures and an inability to communicate. Children with this condition often pass away prior to age 10 years, although survival beyond age 20 years has been reported. PCH2 is caused by changes (mutations) in the TSEN54, TSEN2, TSEN34, or SEPSECS gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment is supportive and based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Death in childhood 7.5% Cerebral atrophy 5% Cerebral cortical atrophy 5% Cortical gyral simplification 5% Ventriculomegaly 5% Abnormality of the periventricular white matter - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Babinski sign - Cerebellar hemisphere hypoplasia - Cerebellar hypoplasia - Cerebellar vermis hypoplasia - Chorea - Clonus - Congenital onset - Dystonia - Extrapyramidal dyskinesia - Feeding difficulties - Gliosis - Hypoplasia of the brainstem - Hypoplasia of the corpus callosum - Hypoplasia of the pons - Impaired smooth pursuit - Limb hypertonia - Microcephaly - Muscular hypotonia of the trunk - Opisthotonus - Poor suck - Progressive microcephaly - Restlessness - Seizures - Severe global developmental delay - Sloping forehead - Visual impairment - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 3. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Brachycephaly - Cerebellar atrophy - Cerebellar hypoplasia - Cerebral atrophy - Congenital onset - Decreased body weight - Depressed nasal bridge - Downturned corners of mouth - Full cheeks - Hearing impairment - High palate - Hyperreflexia - Hypoplasia of the brainstem - Hypoplasia of the corpus callosum - Hypoplasia of the pons - Long palpebral fissure - Long philtrum - Low-set ears - Macrotia - Muscular hypotonia of the trunk - Neonatal hypotonia - Optic atrophy - Poor head control - Progressive - Progressive microcephaly - Proptosis - Seizures - Short stature - Spasticity - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 6. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Apnea - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cerebellar atrophy - Cerebellar hypoplasia - Cerebral atrophy - Congenital onset - Death in childhood - Deeply set eye - Failure to thrive - Hyperreflexia - Increased CSF lactate - Increased serum lactate - Lower limb spasticity - Muscular hypotonia - Narrow forehead - Narrow palate - Poor head control - Poor suck - Progressive - Progressive microcephaly - Prominent nasal bridge - Seizures - Upper limb spasticity - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 5. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Microcephaly - Olivopontocerebellar hypoplasia - Seizures - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 1 (PCH1) is a genetic condition that affects the development of the brain. Individuals with this condition have an unusually small and underdeveloped cerebellum, which is the part of the brain that coordinates movement. A region of the brain called the pons also fails to develop properly. The pons, which is located at the base of the brain in an area called the brainstem, transmits signals from the cerebellum to the rest of the brain. Individuals with PCH1 also experience a degeneration of the anterior horn cells. Because of the anterior horn cell involvement, this condition bears a resemblance to infantile spinal muscular atrophy, with severe muscle weakness. Other signs and symptoms of PCH1 include very weak muscle tone (hypotonia), joint deformities called contractures, a small head size (microcephaly), and breathing problems that are present at birth. Mutations in the VRK1 gene have been identified in at least one family with PCH1. The condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Most children with PCH1 live only into infancy.
 Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 1 (PCH1) may first present in the prenatal period with reduced fetal movement. Polyhydramnios may also be noted. In most cases, the condition is obvious in the newborn period when respiratory insufficiency and muscle weakness present. Multiple contractures may also be present at birth, along with other motor impairment. Mental retardation and other signs of cerebellar disruption, including visual impairment, nystagmus and ataxia, may follow the initial presentation. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the cerebellum 90% Cerebral cortical atrophy 90% Hypertonia 90% Limitation of joint mobility 90% Microcephaly 90% Seizures 90% Deviation of finger 50% Abnormality of the foot - Ataxia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Basal ganglia gliosis - Cerebellar hypoplasia - Congenital contracture - Congenital onset - Degeneration of anterior horn cells - EMG: neuropathic changes - Fasciculations - Feeding difficulties in infancy - Hyperreflexia - Hypoplasia of the pons - Hypoplasia of the ventral pons - Intellectual disability - Muscle weakness - Muscular hypotonia - Neuronal loss in basal ganglia - Progressive - Respiratory insufficiency - Spinal muscular atrophy - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 A specific mutations in the VRK1 gene has caused PCH1 in at least one family. Specific mutations in RARS2 and TSEN54 have also been associated with PCH1. TSEN54 mutations were identified in one case from a family with three siblings with PCH1; DNA was only available in one of the three siblings. Mutations in RARS2 were also identified in one case with PCH1. In general, there is no known genetic cause for the majority of PCH1 cases and no other genes have been linked to PCH1 yet, with the exception of rare cases associated with TSEN54, RARS2 and VRK1 mutations. In fact, only fifteen families with PCH1 have been published thus far; of these, mutations were only identified in 3 families. Further research on these and other candidate genes in PCH1 is necessary to identify mutations involved in the remaining majority of the PCH1 cases.Specific mutations in other genes have been shown to cause the various other forms of pontocerebellar hypoplasia and include the RARS2, TSEN2, TSEN34, and TSEN54 genes. Mutations in three related genes, TSEN2, TSEN34, and TSEN54, can result in PCH2. TSEN54 gene mutations can also cause PCH4 and PCH5.[2951] Mutations in the RARS2 gene can cause PCH6. The genetic cause of PCH3 is unknown.
How  Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 1 (PCH1) is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the associated gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. This means that parents who are carriers of this condition have a 25% chance of having an affected child.
 There is no standard therapy for pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 1. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Microcephaly pontocerebellar hypoplasia dyskinesia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Death in childhood 7.5% Cerebral cortical atrophy 5% Abnormality of the periventricular white matter - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Congenital onset - Extrapyramidal dyskinesia - Gliosis - Hypoplasia of the pons - Impaired smooth pursuit - Opisthotonus - Poor suck - Progressive microcephaly - Restlessness - Seizures - Severe global developmental delay - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The prevalence of pontocerebellar hypoplasia is unknown, although most forms of the disorder appear to be very rare.
Pontocerebellar hypoplasia can result from mutations in several genes. About half of all cases of PCH1 are caused by mutations in the EXOSC3 gene. PCH1 can also result from mutations in several other genes, including TSEN54, RARS2, and VRK1. PCH2 is caused by mutations in the TSEN54, TSEN2, TSEN34, or SEPSECS gene. In addition to causing PCH1 and PCH2, mutations in the TSEN54 gene can cause PCH4 and PCH5. Mutations in the RARS2 gene, in addition to causing PCH1, can result in PCH6. The remaining types of pontocerebellar hypoplasia are caused by mutations in other genes. In some cases, the genetic cause of pontocerebellar hypoplasia is unknown.  The genes associated with pontocerebellar hypoplasia appear to play essential roles in the development and survival of nerve cells (neurons). Many of these genes are known or suspected to be involved in processing RNA molecules, which are chemical cousins of DNA. Fully processed, mature RNA molecules are essential for the normal functioning of all cells, including neurons. Studies suggest that abnormal RNA processing likely underlies the abnormal brain development characteristic of pontocerebellar hypoplasia, although the exact mechanism is unknown. Researchers hypothesize that developing neurons in certain areas of the brain may be particularly sensitive to problems with RNA processing.  Some of the genes associated with pontocerebellar hypoplasia have functions unrelated to RNA processing. In most cases, it is unclear how mutations in these genes impair brain development.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of pontocerebellar hypoplasia:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: EXOSC3-Related Pontocerebellar Hypoplasia  - Gene Review: Gene Review: TSEN54-Related Pontocerebellar Hypoplasia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Pontoneocerebellar hypoplasia  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Microcephaly   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care