Summary : Potassium is a mineral that the body needs to work normally. It helps nerves and muscles communicate. It also helps move nutrients into cells and waste products out of cells. A diet rich in potassium helps to offset some of sodium's harmful effects on blood pressure.    Most people get all the potassium they need from what they eat and drink. Sources of potassium in the diet include       - Leafy greens, such as spinach and collards    - Fruit from vines, such as grapes and blackberries    - Root vegetables, such as carrots and potatoes    - Citrus fruits, such as oranges and grapefruit
Potassium aggravated myotonia is a group of diseases that causes tensing and stiffness (myotonia) of skeletal muscles, which are the muscles used for movement.  The three types of potassium-aggravated myotonia include myotonia fluctuans, myotonia permanens, and acetazolamide-sensitive myotonia.  Potassium aggravated myotonia is different from other types of myotonia because symptoms get worse when an affected individual eats food that is rich in potassium.  Symptoms usually develop during childhood and vary, ranging from infrequent mild episodes to long periods of severe disease.  Potassium aggravated myotonia is an inherited condition that is caused by changes (mutations) in the SCN4A gene.  Treatment begins with avoiding foods that contain large amounts of potassium; other treatments may include physical therapy (stretching or massages to help relax muscles) or certain medications (such as mexiletine, carbamazapine, or acetazolamide).
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Potassium aggravated myotonia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) EMG abnormality 90% Flexion contracture 90% Hypertonia 90% Myalgia 90% Myotonia 90% Chest pain 50% Feeding difficulties in infancy 50% Gait disturbance 50% Abnormality of the nose 7.5% Abnormality of the voice 7.5% Asthma 7.5% Cognitive impairment 7.5% Elevated serum creatine phosphokinase 7.5% Epicanthus 7.5% Hyperkalemia 7.5% Hyperlordosis 7.5% Hypothyroidism 7.5% Limitation of joint mobility 7.5% Long philtrum 7.5% Muscle weakness 7.5% Muscular edema 7.5% Myopathy 7.5% Ophthalmoparesis 7.5% Paresthesia 7.5% Respiratory insufficiency 7.5% Short neck 7.5% Short stature 7.5% Skeletal muscle atrophy 7.5% Skeletal muscle hypertrophy 7.5% Apneic episodes in infancy - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Muscle stiffness - Stridor - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.