Key Points
                    - Ovarian low malignant potential tumor is a disease in which abnormal cells form in the tissue covering the ovary.     - Signs and symptoms of ovarian low malignant potential tumor include pain or swelling in the abdomen.    - Tests that examine the ovaries are used to detect (find), diagnose, and stage ovarian low malignant potential tumor.    - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options.
                
                
                    Ovarian low malignant potential tumor is a disease in which abnormal cells form in the tissue covering the ovary.
                    Ovarian low malignant potential tumors have abnormal cells that may become cancer, but usually do not. This disease usually remains in the ovary. When disease is found in one ovary, the other ovary should also be checked carefully for signs of disease.    The ovaries are a pair of organs in the female reproductive system. They are in the pelvis, one on each side of the uterus (the hollow, pear-shaped organ where a fetus grows). Each ovary is about the size and shape of an almond. The ovaries make eggs and female hormones.
Signs and symptoms of ovarian low malignant potential tumor include pain or swelling in the abdomen.Ovarian low malignant potential tumor may not cause early signs or symptoms. If you do have signs or symptoms, they may include the following:         - Pain or swelling in the abdomen.    - Pain in the pelvis.    -  Gastrointestinal problems, such as gas, bloating, or constipation.        These signs and symptoms may be caused by other conditions. If they get worse or do not go away on their own, check with your doctor.
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options.The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following:          - The stage of the disease (whether it affects part of the ovary, involves the whole ovary, or has spread to other places in the body).    - What type of cells make up the tumor.    - The size of the tumor.    - The patients general health.         Patients with ovarian low malignant potential tumors have a good prognosis, especially when the tumor is found early.
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials.
                    Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI Web site.
                
                
                    Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial.
                    For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the medical research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment.   Many of today's standard treatments for disease are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment.    Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way diseases will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward.
                
                
                    Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their treatment.
                    Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose disease has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop a disease from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of treatment.   Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's clinical trials database.