Potocki-Shaffer syndrome is a contiguous gene deletion syndrome associated with deletions in a specific region of chromosome 11 (11p11.2). The characteristic features of Potocki-Shaffer syndrome include openings in the two bones that form the top and sides of the skull (enlarged parietal foramina), multiple benign bone tumors called exostoses, intellectual disability, developmental delay, a distinctive facial appearance, autism and problems with vision and hearing. In some cases, individuals with the syndrome may have a defect in the heart, kidneys, or urinary tract. The features of Potocki-Shaffer syndrome result from the loss of several genes on the short (p) arm of chromosome 11. In particular, the deletion of a gene called ALX4 causes enlarged parietal foramina, while the loss of another gene, EXT2, causes the multiple exostoses. Another condition called WAGR syndrome is caused by a deletion of genetic material in the p arm of chromosome 11, specifically at position 11p13. Occasionally, a deletion is large enough to include the 11p11.2 and 11p13 regions. Individuals with such a deletion have signs and symptoms of both Potocki-Shaffer syndrome and WAGR syndrome. A referral to an early childhood intervention and developmental-behavioral specialist at the time of diagnosis and to have an evaluation for vision and hearing problems, as well as a full skeletal survey at the time of diagnosis or by age 3 years, whichever is later, is recommended.
 The treatment depends on the signs and symptoms present in the affected individual. The following treatment options or recommendations might be offered: Treatment of Wilms tumor, which may include surgery to remove the kidney, radiation therapy and chemotherapy. Treatment of aniridia is aimed at maintaining vision. Glaucoma or cataracts can be treated with medication or surgery. Contact lenses should be avoided because they can damage the cornea. In cases of abnormalities in the testes or ovaries, surgery may be needed to remove them or to prevent cancer (gonadoblastoma). After they testes or ovaries are removed hormone replacement is needed. Children with undescended testicles (cryptorchidism) may also need surgery. In a study with 6 patients and a review of 31 previously reported cases of Potocki-Shaffer syndrome, the researchers made several recommendations for the care of children with the syndrome. These include: Referral to early childhood intervention and a developmental-behavioral specialist at the time of diagnosis; A full skeletal survey at diagnosis or by age three; Screening for strabismus and nystagmus by the pediatrician (at every well-child examination), and referral to a pediatric ophthalmologist at diagnosis or by age six months; Hearing loss evaluations in infants with the syndrome and after that at three months of age; audiogram at age one year and annually thereafter; Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) studies and genetic counseling should be offered to the parents of a child with Potocki-Shaffer syndrome; Referral to a specialist in development and behavior at the time of diagnosis for vision therapy, physical, occupational and speech therapy; Abdominal and kidney ultrasound due to the possible risk of developing a Wilms' tumor, especially in those individuals who have a deletion in the 11p13 region;  Cardiac evaluation to detect any heart abnormalities; Thyroid hormone level measurements to detect the hypothyroidism; and MRI scans are recommended if the individual has seizures, microcephaly, or global developmental delay.  Some individuals with Potocki-Shaffer syndrome, WAGR syndrome, and renal insufficiency may be treated with dialysis or kidney transplant.
Potocki-Shaffer syndrome is a rare condition, although its prevalence is unknown. Fewer than 100 cases have been reported in the scientific literature.
Potocki-Shaffer syndrome (also known as proximal 11p deletion syndrome) is caused by a deletion of genetic material from the short (p) arm of chromosome 11 at a position designated 11p11.2. The size of the deletion varies among affected individuals. Studies suggest that the full spectrum of features is caused by a deletion of at least 2.1 million DNA building blocks (base pairs), also written as 2.1 megabases (Mb). The loss of multiple genes within the deleted region causes the varied signs and symptoms of Potocki-Shaffer syndrome.  In particular, deletion of the EXT2, ALX4, and PHF21A genes are associated with several of the characteristic features of Potocki-Shaffer syndrome. Research shows that loss of the EXT2 gene is associated with the development of multiple osteochondromas in affected individuals. Deletion of another gene, ALX4, causes the enlarged parietal foramina found in people with this condition. In addition, loss of the PHF21A gene is the cause of intellectual disability and distinctive facial features in many people with the condition. The loss of additional genes in the deleted region likely contributes to the other features of Potocki-Shaffer syndrome.
Potocki-Shaffer syndrome follows an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern, which means a deletion of genetic material from one copy of chromosome 11 is sufficient to cause the disorder. In some cases, an affected person inherits the chromosome with a deleted segment from an affected parent. More commonly, the condition results from a deletion that occurs during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs and sperm) in a parent or in early fetal development. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.