Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS) is a rare genetic disorder. It causes poor muscle tone, low levels of sex hormones and a constant feeling of hunger. The part of the brain that controls feelings of fullness or hunger does not work properly in people with PWS. They overeat, leading to obesity.    Babies with PWS are usually floppy, with poor muscle tone, and have trouble sucking. Boys may have undescended testicles. Later, other signs appear. These include       - Short stature    - Poor motor skills    - Weight gain     - Underdeveloped sex organs    - Mild intellectual and learning disabilities       There is no cure for PWS. Growth hormone, exercise, and dietary supervision can help build muscle mass and control weight. Other treatments may include sex hormones and behavior therapy. Most people with PWS will need specialized care and supervision throughout their lives.    NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a genetic condition that affects many parts of the body. Infants with PWS have severe hypotonia (low muscle tone), feeding difficulties, and slow growth. In later infancy or early childhood, affected children typically begin to eat excessively and become obese. Other signs and symptoms often include short stature, hypogonadism, developmental delays, cognitive impairment, and distinctive behavioral characteristics such as temper tantrums, stubbornness, and obsessive-compulsive tendencies. PWS is caused by missing or non-working genes on chromosome 15. Most cases are not inherited and occur randomly. Rarely, a genetic change responsible for PWS can be inherited. Management of PWS generally depends on the affected person's age and symptoms.
 Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is caused by the loss of active genes in a specific region of chromosome 15. People normally inherit one copy of chromosome 15 from each parent. Some genes on chromosome 15 are only active (or "expressed") on the copy that is inherited from a person's father (the paternal copy). When genes are only active if inherited from a specific parent, it is called genomic imprinting. About 70% of cases of PWS occur when a person is missing specific genes on the long arm of the paternal copy of chromosome 15. This is called a deletion. While there are copies of these same genes on the maternal copy of chromosome 15, the maternal copies of these genes are not expressed.   In about 25% of cases, PWS is due to a person inheriting only 2 maternal copies of chromosome 15, instead of one copy from each parent. This is called maternal uniparental disomy. Rarely (in about 2% of cases), PWS is caused by a rearrangement of chromosome material called a translocation, or by a change (mutation) or other defect that abnormally inactivates genes on the paternal chromosome 15. Each of these genetic changes result in a loss of gene function on part of chromosome 15, likely causing the characteristic features of PWS.
 Most cases of Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) are not inherited and are due to random events during the formation of egg or sperm cells, or in early fetal development. This is usually the case when PWS is caused by a deletion in the paternal chromosome 15, or by maternal uniparental disomy. However in rare cases, a genetic change responsible for PWS can be inherited. The risk to family members of a person with PWS depends on the genetic cause of the condition in the affected person. Because the various genetic causes of PWS are complex, people seeking information about specific risks to themselves or family members are encouraged to speak with a genetics professional. More information about the causes of PWS can be viewed on our Web site here.
 There are clinical diagnostic criteria for Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) that were developed in the past that continue to be useful. These criteria can be viewed on the National Institute of Health's NICHD Web site. However, the current mainstay of a diagnosis when PWS is suspected is a form of genetic testing called DNA methylation testing. This testing can detect abnormal, parent-specific imprinting on the region of chromosome 15 that is responsible for PWS. It determines whether the region is maternally inherited only (i.e., the paternally contributed region is absent) and confirms a diagnosis in more than 99% of affected people. DNA methylation testing is especially important in people who have non-classic features, or are too young to show enough features to make the diagnosis based on signs and symptoms alone.
Prader-Willi syndrome affects an estimated 1 in 10,000 to 30,000 people worldwide.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Prader-Willi syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Prader-Willi Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Prader-Willi syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hypotonia  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Prader-Willi Syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care