Prediabetes means you have blood glucose, or blood sugar, levels that are higher than normal but not high enough to be called diabetes. Glucose comes from the foods you eat. Too much glucose in your blood can damage your body over time. If you have prediabetes, you are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes, heart disease, and stroke.    Most people with prediabetes don't have any symptoms. Your doctor can use an A1C test or another blood test to find out if your blood glucose levels are higher than normal. If you are 45 years old or older, your doctor may recommend that you be tested for prediabetes, especially if you are overweight.    Losing weight - at least 5 to 10 percent of your starting weight - can prevent or delay diabetes or even reverse prediabetes. That's 10 to 20 pounds for someone who weighs 200 pounds. You can lose weight by cutting down on the amount of calories and fat you eat and being physically active at least 30 minutes a day. Being physically active makes your body's insulin work better. Your doctor may also prescribe medicine to help control the amount of glucose in your blood.    NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
Prediabetes is when blood glucose levels are higher than normal but not high enough for a diagnosis of diabetes. Prediabetes means a person is at increased risk for developing type 2 diabetes, as well as for heart disease and stroke. Many people with prediabetes develop type 2 diabetes within 10 years.
                
However, modest weight loss and moderate physical activity can help people with prediabetes delay or prevent type 2 diabetes.
A major research study, the Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP), proved that people with prediabetes were able to sharply reduce their risk of developing diabetes during the study by losing 5 to 7 percent of their body weight through dietary changes and increased physical activity.
                
Study participants followed a low-fat, low-calorie diet and engaged in regular physical activity, such as walking briskly five times a week for 30 minutes. These strategies worked well for both men and women in all racial and ethnic groups, but were especially effective for participants age 60 and older. A follow-up study, the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study (DPPOS), showed losing weight and being physically active provide lasting results. Ten years after the DPP, modest weight loss delayed onset of type 2 diabetes by an average of 4 years.
                
The diabetes medication metformin also lowers the risk of type 2 diabetes in people with prediabetes, especially those who are younger and heavier and women who have had gestational diabetes. The DPPOS showed that metformin delayed type 2 diabetes by 2 years. People at high risk should ask their health care provider if they should take metformin to prevent type 2 diabetes. Metformin is a medication that makes insulin work better and can reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes.
                
More information about insulin resistance, the DPP, or how to lower risk for type 2 diabetes is provided in the NIDDK health topics:
                
- Am I at Risk for Type 2 Diabetes?  - Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP)  - Insulin Resistance and Prediabetes
                
Additional information about the DPP, funded under NIH clinical trial number NCT00004992, and the DPPOS, funded under NIH clinical trial number NCT00038727, can be found at www.bsc.gwu.edu/dpp.
                
As part of its Small Steps, Big Rewards campaign, the National Diabetes Education Program (NDEP) offers several booklets about preventing type 2 diabetes, including information about setting goals, tracking progress, implementing a walking program, and finding additional resources. These materials are available at www.ndep.nih.gov or by calling the NDEP at 1888693NDEP (18886936337).
People can manage their diabetes with meal planning, physical activity, and if needed, medications. More information about taking care of type 1 or type 2 diabetes is provided in the NIDDK health topics:
                
- What I need to know about Diabetes Medicines  - What I need to know about Eating and Diabetes  - Your Guide to Diabetes: Type 1 and Type 2
                
These NDIC publications are available at http://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/health-topics/Diabetes/Pages/default.aspx or by calling 18008608747.
- Tests used for diagnosing diabetes and prediabetes include the A1C testfor type 2 diabetes and prediabetesthe fasting plasma glucose (FPG) test, and the oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT). Another blood test, the random plasma glucose (RPG) test, is sometimes used to diagnose diabetes when symptoms are present during a regular health checkup.  - Anyone age 45 or older should consider getting tested for diabetes or prediabetes. People younger than 45 should consider testing if they are overweight or obese and have one or more additional risk factors for diabetes.  - If results of testing are normal, testing should be repeated at least every 3 years. Health care providers may recommend more frequent testing depending on initial results and risk status.  - People whose test results indicate they have prediabetes may be tested again in 1 year and should take steps to prevent or delay type 2 diabetes.  - Many people with prediabetes develop type 2 diabetes within 10 years.  - Modest weight loss and moderate physical activity can help people with prediabetes delay or prevent type 2 diabetes.