Too much glucose in the blood for a long time can cause diabetes problems. This high blood glucose, also called blood sugar, can damage many parts of the body, such as the heart, blood vessels, eyes, and kidneys. Heart and blood vessel disease can lead to heart attacks and strokes, the leading causes of death for people with diabetes. You can do a lot to prevent or slow down diabetes problems.
                
This booklet is about heart and blood vessel problems caused by diabetes. You will learn the things you can do each day and during each year to stay healthy and prevent diabetes problems.
You can do a lot to prevent heart disease and stroke.
                
- Keep your blood glucose under control. You can see if your blood glucose is under control by having an A1C test at least twice a year. The A1C test tells you your average blood glucose for the past 2 to 3 months. The target for most people with diabetes is below 7. In some people with heart disease or other special circumstances, their doctor may recommend slightly higher levels of A1C.  - Keep your blood pressure under control. Have it checked at every doctor visit. The target for most people with diabetes is below 140/80, unless their doctor sets a different target.  - Keep your cholesterol under control. Have it checked at least once a year. The targets for most people with diabetes are      - LDLbadcholesterol: below 100    - HDLgoodcholesterol: above 40 in men and above 50 in women    - triglyceridesanother type of fat in the blood: below 150    - Make sure the foods you eat are "heart-healthy." Include foods high in fiber, such as oat bran, oatmeal, whole-grain breads and cereals, fruits, and vegetables. Cut back on foods high in saturated fat or cholesterol, such as meats, butter, dairy products with fat, eggs, shortening, lard, and foods with palm oil or coconut oil. Limit foods with trans fat, such as snack foods and commercial baked goods.  - If you smoke, quit. Your doctor can tell you about ways to help you quit smoking.  - Ask your doctor whether you should take an aspirin every day. Studies have shown that taking a low dose of aspirin every day can help reduce your risk of heart disease and stroke.  - Take your medicines as directed.
You may have one or more of the following warning signs:
                
- chest pain or discomfort  - pain or discomfort in your arms, back, jaw, or neck  - indigestion or stomach pain  - shortness of breath  - sweating  - nausea  - light-headedness
                
Or, you may have no warning signs at all. Warning signs may come and go. If you have any of these warning signs, call 911 right away. Getting prompt treatment can reduce damage to the heart.
Narrowed blood vessels leave a smaller opening for blood to flow through. Having narrowed blood vessels is like turning on a garden hose and holding your thumb over the opening. The smaller opening makes the water shoot out with more pressure. In the same way, narrowed blood vessels lead to high blood pressure. Other factors, such as kidney problems and being overweight, also can lead to high blood pressure.
                
Many people with diabetes also have high blood pressure. If you have heart, eye, or kidney problems from diabetes, high blood pressure can make them worse.
                
You will see your blood pressure written with two numbers separated by a slash. For example, your reading might be 120/70, said as "120 over 70." For most people with diabetes, the target is to keep the first number below 140 and the second number below 80, unless their doctor sets a different target.
                
If you have high blood pressure, ask your doctor how to lower it. Your doctor may ask you to take blood pressure medicine every day. Some types of blood pressure medicine can also help keep your kidneys healthy.
                
You may also be able to control your blood pressure by
                
- eating more fruits and vegetables  - eating less salt and high-sodium foods  - losing weight if you need to  - being physically active  - not smoking  - limiting alcoholic drinks
Your nervous system carries signals between your brain and other parts of your body through your spinal cord. Nerves are bundles of special tissues that transmit these signals.
                
The signals share information between your brain and body about how things feel. The signals also send information between your brain and body to control automatic body functions, such as breathing and digestion, and to move your body parts.
                
The nerves in your spinal cord branch out to all of your organs and body parts. All your nerves together make up your nervous system.
                
Your nervous system is composed of the
                
- central nervous systemyour brain and spinal cord  - cranial* nervesnerves that connect your brain to your head, neck, and face  - peripheral nervous systemnerves that connect your spinal cord to your entire body, including your organs and your arms, hands, legs, and feet
                
*See the Pronunciation Guide for tips on how to say the the words in bold type.
Nerve damage symptoms depend on which nerves have damage. Some people have no symptoms or mild symptoms. Other people have painful and long-lasting symptoms. As most nerve damage develops over many years, a person may not notice mild cases for a long time. In some people, the onset of pain may be sudden and severe.
The treatment for nerve damage from diabetes is based on your symptoms. No treatment can reverse nerve damage; however, it can help you feel better. Your doctor might suggest taking low doses of medicines that both treat other health problems and help the pain of neuropathy. Some of these medicines include
                
- antidepressants  - anticonvulsants, or anti-seizure medicines
                
Other treatment options include
                
- creams or patches on your skin for burning pain  - over-the-counter pain medicines  - acupuncture, a form of pain treatment that uses needles inserted into your body at certain pressure points  - physical therapy, which helps with muscle weakness and loss of balance  - relaxation exercises, such as yoga  - special shoes to fit softly around sore feet or feet that have changed shape
                
Your doctor also can prescribe medicines to help with problems caused by nerve damage in other areas of your body, such as poor digestion, dizziness, sexual problems, and lack of bladder control.
                
Stopping smoking and drinking alcoholic beverages also may help with symptoms.
You can keep your nervous system healthy by taking these steps:
                
- Eat healthy meals and follow the meal plan that you and your doctor or dietitian have worked out.  - If you drink alcoholic beverages, limit your intake to no more than one drink per day for women and two drinks per day for men. Drinking too many alcoholic beverages can make nerve damage worse.
                
More information is provided in the NIDDK health topic, What I need to know about Eating and Diabetes.
Your kidneys are two bean-shaped organs, each about the size of a fist. They are located just below your rib cage, one on each side of your spine. Every day, your two kidneys filter about 120 to 150 quarts of blood to produce about 1 to 2 quarts of urine. Urine flows from your kidneys to your bladder through tubes called ureters. Your bladder stores urine until releasing it through urination.
In the early stages, diabetic kidney disease does not have any symptoms. Kidney disease happens so slowly that you may not feel sick at all for many years. You may not feel sick even when your kidneys do only half the job of healthy kidneys. Only your doctor can tell if you have kidney disease by checking the protein, or albumin, level in your urine at least once a year.
                
The first symptom of diabetic kidney disease is often swelling in parts of your body, such as your hands, face, feet, or ankles. Also, large amounts of protein in your urine may cause urine to look foamy. Once your kidney function starts to decrease, other symptoms may include
                
- increased or decreased urination  - feeling drowsy or tired  - feeling itchy or numb  - dry skin  - headaches  - weight loss  - not feeling hungry  - feeling sick to your stomach  - vomiting  - sleep problems  - trouble staying focused  - darkened skin  - muscle cramps
Diabetes problems are health problems that can happen when you have diabetes. If your diabetes is not under control, you will have too much glucose*, also called sugar, in your blood. Having too much glucose in your blood for a long time can affect many important parts of your body, such as your
                
- blood vessels and heart  - nerves  - kidneys  - mouth  - eyes  - feet
                
You can do a lot to prevent or slow down these health problems if you keep your diabetes under control.
                
This chart shows the body parts that can be affected by diabetes and the resulting health problems you may have.
                
Affected Body Part    Resulting Health Problems You May Have          Blood vessels and heart             - Heart disease      - Heart attack      - Stroke      - High blood pressure      - Poor blood circulation, or flow, throughout your body            Nerves             - Pain, tingling, weakness, or numbness in your hands, arms, feet, or legs      - Problems with your bladder, digestion, having sex, and keeping your heartbeats and blood pressure steady            Kidneys             - Protein loss through your urine      - Buildup of wastes and fluid in your blood            Mouth             - Gum disease and loss of teeth      - Dry mouth      - Thrush, or the growth of too much fungus in the mouth            Eyes             - Loss of vision and blindness            Feet             - Sores      - Infections      - Amputation
                
*See the Pronunciation Guide for tips on how to say the the words in bold type.
Following a healthy eating plan is a key step in living with diabetes and preventing diabetes problems. Your health care team will help you make a healthy eating plan.
                
More information is provided in the NIDDK health topic, What I need to know about Eating and Diabetes or call 18008608747.
You can take steps each day to prevent diabetes problems.
                
Steps          Healthy Eating                     - Follow the healthy eating plan that you and your doctor or dietitian have made.      - Learn what to eat to keep your blood glucose levels under control.      - Make wise food choices to help you feel good every day and to lose weight if needed.            Blood Glucose                     - Check your blood glucose every day.      - Each time you check your blood glucose, write the number in a record book to share with your health care team.      - Treat low blood glucose quickly.            Physical Activity                     - Even small amounts of physical activity help manage diabetes. Aim for 30 to 60 minutes of physical activity most days of the week. Children and adolescents with type 2 diabetes who are 10 to 17 years old should aim for 60 minutes of activity every day.      - Not all physical activity has to take place at the same time.      - Do aerobic activities, such as brisk walking, which use your large muscles to make your heart beat faster. The large muscles are those of the upper and lower arms and legs and those that control head, shoulder, and hip movements.      - Do activities to strengthen muscles and bone, such as lifting weights or sit-ups. Aim for two times a week.      - Stretch to increase your flexibility, lower stress, and help prevent muscle soreness after physical activity.      - Increase daily activity by decreasing time spent watching TV or at the computer. Children and adolescents should limit screen time not related to school to less than 2 hours per day. Limiting screen time can help you meet your physical activity goal.      - Always talk with your doctor before you start a new physical activity program.            Medicines                     - Take your medicines as directed, including insulin if ordered by your doctor.            Feet                     - Check your feet every day for cuts, blisters, sores, swelling, redness, or sore toenails.            Mouth                     - Brush and floss your teeth every day.            Blood Pressure                     - Control your blood pressure and cholesterol.            Smoking                     - Dont smoke.
This chart lists important tests, exams, and vaccines to get at least once or twice a year.
                
Tests, Exams, and Vaccines to Get at Least Once or Twice a Year    Make Sure to          A1C test             - Have this blood test at least twice a year. Your result will tell you what your average blood glucose level was for the past 3 months.            Cholesterol test             - Get a blood test to check your              - total cholesterol        - LDL        - HDL        - triglycerides                  Kidney tests             - Once a year, get a urine test to check for protein.      - At least once a year, get a blood test to check for creatinine, a waste product healthy kidneys remove from the body.            Eye exam             - See an eye doctor once a year for a complete eye exam that includes using drops in your eyes to dilate your pupils.      - If you are pregnant, have a complete eye exam in your first 3 months of pregnancy. Have another complete eye exam 1 year after your baby is born.            Dental exam             - See your dentist twice a year for a cleaning and checkup.            Flu vaccine             - Get a flu vaccine each year.            Pneumonia vaccine             - Get this vaccine if you are younger than 64.      - If youre older than 64 and your vaccine was more than 5 years ago, get another one.            Hepatitis B vaccine             - Get this vaccine if youre younger than 60 and you have not already had the vaccine.      - Prevent exposure to Hepatitis B by not sharing blood glucose monitors or other diabetes equipment.
Often, no symptoms appear during the early stages of diabetes retina problems. As retina problems worsen, your symptoms might include
                
- blurry or double vision  - rings, flashing lights, or blank spots in your vision  - dark or floating spots in your vision  - pain or pressure in one or both of your eyes  - trouble seeing things out of the corners of your eyes
You can help your diabetes retina problems by controlling your
                
- blood glucose  - blood pressure  - cholesterol and triglycerides, or types of blood fat
                
If your retinopathy still does not improve, then you may need other treatments. You will need to see an ophthalmologist who can decide whether you need one of these treatments:
                
- Medicines. Your doctor treats macular edema with injections of medicines into the eye. These medicines block a protein in the body that causes abnormal blood vessel growth and fluid leakage. Reducing the fluid leakage often allows the retina to return to normal thickness. The ophthalmologist will numb your eye and then insert a tiny needle to deliver the medicine.  - Laser treatment. Your doctor can also treat macular edema with focal laser treatment. In one visit, the ophthalmologist will numb your eye and place many small laser burns in the areas leaking fluid near the macula. These burns slow the leakage of fluid and reduce the amount of fluid in your retina.  Sometimes your doctor also treats diabetic retinopathy with scatter laser treatment. In two or more visits, the ophthalmologist will numb your eye and place thousands of laser burns around the new, weak blood vessels away from the macula, causing them to shrink.  Laser treatment can greatly reduce your chances of blindness from retina damage. However, laser treatment often cannot restore vision that has already been lost.  Treatment with medicines or lasers can be performed in your ophthalmologists office.  - Vitrectomy. If the bleeding in your eye is severe, you may need to go to the hospital for a surgery called a vitrectomy. Your ophthalmologist will numb your eye or give you general anesthesia to help you fall asleep. The ophthalmologist will make a tiny cut in your eye and remove the vitreous gel that is clouded with blood. The ophthalmologist replaces the vitreous gel with a salt solution.