Progressive pseudorheumatoid arthropathy of childhood (PPAC) is a disorder of bone and cartilage that affects many joints. Major signs and symptoms include stiff joints (contractures), short stature, and widening of the ends of the finger and toe bones as well as other tubular bones. PPAC may initially be mistaken for juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, however people with this condition do not have the laboratory test results of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. PPAC is caused by a mutation in the WISP3 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. People with PPAC typically need joint replacement surgery at an early age. Other forms of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda include: X-linked spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda  Autosomal dominant spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda  Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda Toledo type
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Progressive pseudorheumatoid arthropathy of childhood. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the hip bone 90% Limitation of joint mobility 90% Short stature 90% Abnormal form of the vertebral bodies 50% Abnormality of the knees 50% Kyphosis 50% Osteoarthritis 50% Scoliosis 50% Abnormality of the foot - Arthropathy - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Camptodactyly of finger - Coxa vara - Decreased cervical spine mobility - Difficulty walking - Enlarged epiphyses - Enlarged interphalangeal joints - Enlarged metacarpophalangeal joints - Enlargement of the proximal femoral epiphysis - Flattened epiphysis - Genu varum - Joint stiffness - Joint swelling - Kyphoscoliosis - Metaphyseal widening - Muscle weakness - Osteoporosis - Platyspondyly - Sclerotic vertebral endplates - Waddling gait - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Progressive pseudorheumatoid dysplasia (PPRD) is a joint disease that worsens over time. This condition is characterized by breakdown (degeneration) of the cartilage between bones (articular cartilage). This cartilage covers and protects the ends of bones, and its degeneration leads to pain and stiffness in the joints and other features of PPRD.  PPRD usually begins in childhood, between ages 3 and 8. The first indications are usually an abnormal walking pattern, weakness and fatigue when active, and stiffness in the joints in the fingers and in the knees. Other signs and symptoms that develop over time include permanently bent fingers (camptodactyly), enlarged finger and knee joints (often mistaken as swelling), and a reduced amount of space between the bones at the hip and knee joints. Hip pain is a common problem by adolescence. Affected individuals have flattened bones in the spine (platyspondyly) that are abnormally shaped (beaked), which leads to an abnormal front-to-back curvature of the spine (kyphosis) and a short torso. At birth, people with PPRD are of normal length, but by adulthood, they are usually shorter than their peers. Affected adults also have abnormal deposits of calcium around the elbow, knee, and hip joints and limited movement in all joints, including those of the spine.  PPRD is often mistaken for another joint disorder that affects young people called juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. However, the joint problems in juvenile rheumatoid arthritis are associated with inflammation, while those in PPRD are not.
PPRD has been estimated to occur in approximately 1 per million people in the United Kingdom. The condition is thought to be more common in Turkey and the Middle East, although its prevalence in these regions is unknown. The condition in all regions is likely underdiagnosed because it is often misdiagnosed as juvenile rheumatoid arthritis.
PPRD is caused by mutations in the WISP3 gene. The function of the protein produced from this gene is not well understood, although it is thought to play a role in bone growth and cartilage maintenance. The WISP3 protein is made in cells called chondrocytes, which produce and maintain cartilage. This protein is associated with the production of certain proteins that make up cartilage, but its role in their production is unclear. WISP3 may also help control signaling pathways involved in the development of cartilage and bone and may help regulate the breakdown of cartilage components.  WISP3 gene mutations lead to an altered protein that may not function. Loss of WISP3 protein function likely disrupts normal cartilage maintenance and bone growth, leading to the cartilage degeneration and joint problems that occur in PPRD.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of progressive pseudorheumatoid dysplasia:  - Cedars-Sinai: Skeletal Dysplasias  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Progressive Pseudorheumatoid Dysplasia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Progressive pseudorheumatoid dysplasia   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care