Horizontal gaze palsy with progressive scoliosis (HGPPS) is a rare disorder that affects vision and also causes an abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis). People with this condition are unable to move their eyes side-to-side (horizontally) and must turn their head instead of moving their eyes to track moving objects. Scoliosis develops in infancy or childhood and worsens over time. Scoliosis can be painful and may interfere with movement so it is often treated with surgery early in life. HGPPS is caused by changes (mutations) in the ROBO3 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Horizontal gaze palsy with progressive scoliosis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Kyphosis 90% Cognitive impairment 50% Nystagmus 50% Short neck 50% Seizures 7.5% Sensorineural hearing impairment 7.5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Congenital onset - Horizontal supranuclear gaze palsy - Progressive ophthalmoplegia - Thoracolumbar scoliosis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Progressive bulbar palsy involves the brain stem. The brain stem is the part of the brain needed for swallowing, speaking, chewing, and other functions. Signs and symptoms of progressive bulbar palsy include difficulty swallowing, weak jaw and facial muscles, progressive loss of speech, and weakening of the tongue. Additional symptoms include less prominent weakness in the arms and legs, and outbursts of laughing or crying (called emotional lability). Progressive bulbar palsy is considered a variant form of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Many people with progressive bulbar palsy later develop ALS. While there is no cure for progressive bulbar palsy or for ALS, doctors can treat symptoms.
 What tests aid in the diagnosis of progressive bulbar palsy? Progressive bulbar palsy is a difficult to diagnose condition. No one test or procedure offers a definitive diagnosis. Diagnosis is largely based upon the person's symptoms, tests that show how well their nerves are working (e.g., an EMG or electromyography), and ruling out other causes for the symptoms. Particularly, stroke and a condition called myasthenia gravis, may have certain symptoms that are similar to those of progressive bulbar palsy and must be ruled out prior to diagnosing this disorder. Testing for acetylcholine receptor-binding antibodies may be helpful in ruling out myasthenia gravis. Because of the lack of definitive tests, you may find it helpful to consult with a doctor who is experienced in diagnosing ALS. The ALS Association lists experts and specialty centers through their Web site at: http://www.alsa.org/community/als-clinics
 Treatments aim to help people cope with the symptoms of progressive bulbar palsy, such as feeding tubes, devices to help with talking, and medicines to treat muscle spasms, weakness, drooling, sleep problems, pain, and depression. The Robert Packard Center for ALS Research at John Hopkins offers further general information on treatment: http://www.alscenter.org/living_with_als/treatment.html The Mayo Clinic provides information on treatment of ALS in general, which may be helpful: http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/amyotrophic-lateral-sclerosis/basics/treatment/con-20024397 If you are interested in learning about clinical trials, we recommend that you call the Patient Recruitment and Public Liaison (PRPL) Office at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) at 1-800-411-1222. Organizations, such as the ALS Association and Muscular Dystrophy Association are great sources for information on clinical trial opportunities and research. You can find information about participating in a clinical trial as well as learn about resources for travel and lodging assistance, through the Get Involved in Research section of our Web site.
Horizontal gaze palsy with progressive scoliosis (HGPPS) is a disorder that affects vision and also causes an abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis). People with this condition are unable to move their eyes side-to-side (horizontally). As a result, affected individuals must turn their head instead of moving their eyes to track moving objects. Up-and-down (vertical) eye movements are typically normal.  In people with HGPPS, an abnormal side-to-side curvature of the spine develops in infancy or childhood. It tends to be moderate to severe and worsens over time. Because the abnormal spine position can be painful and interfere with movement, it is often treated with surgery early in life.
HGPPS has been reported in several dozen families worldwide.
HGPPS is caused by mutations in the ROBO3 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is important for the normal development of certain nerve pathways in the brain. These include motor nerve pathways, which transmit information about voluntary muscle movement, and sensory nerve pathways, which transmit information about sensory input (such as touch, pain, and temperature). For the brain and the body to communicate effectively, these nerve pathways must cross from one side of the body to the other in the brainstem, a region that connects the upper parts of the brain with the spinal cord.  The ROBO3 protein plays a critical role in ensuring that motor and sensory nerve pathways cross over in the brainstem. In people with HGPPS, these pathways do not cross over, but stay on the same side of the body. Researchers believe that this miswiring in the brainstem is the underlying cause of the eye movement abnormalities associated with the disorder. The cause of progressive scoliosis in HGPPS is unclear. Researchers are working to determine why the effects of ROBO3 mutations appear to be limited to horizontal eye movement and scoliosis.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of HGPPS:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Gaze palsy, familial horizontal, with progressive scoliosis   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care