A prolactinoma is a tumor of the pituitary gland, which controls production of many hormones.  A prolactinoma causes increased levels of the hormone prolactin.  The symptoms of prolactinoma may include unusual milk production (galactorrhea) or no menstrual cycles (amenorrhea) in women or decreased sex drive in men.  Most prolactinomas occur by chance (sporadically); in a small number of cases, prolactinoma may be associated with an inherited condition such as Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) or other genetic factor.
A prolactinoma is a benign noncancerous tumor of the pituitary gland that produces a hormone called prolactin. Prolactinomas are the most common type of pituitary tumor. Symptoms of prolactinoma are caused by hyperprolactinemia --- too much prolactin in the blood --- or by pressure of the tumor on surrounding tissues.
                
Prolactin stimulates the breast to produce milk during pregnancy.  After giving birth, a mothers prolactin levels fall unless she breastfeeds her infant. Each time the baby nurses, prolactin levels rise to maintain milk production.
Although small benign pituitary tumors are fairly common in the general population, symptomatic prolactinomas are uncommon. Prolactinomas occur more often in women than men and rarely occur in children.
In women, high levels of prolactin in the blood often cause infertility and changes in menstruation. In some women, periods may stop. In others, periods may become irregular or menstrual flow may change. Women who are not pregnant or nursing may begin producing breast milk. Some women may experience a loss of libido-interest in sex. Intercourse may become painful because of vaginal dryness.
                
In men, the most common symptom of prolactinoma is erectile dysfunction. Because men have no reliable indicator such as changes in menstruation to signal a problem, many men delay going to the doctor until they have headaches or eye problems caused by the enlarged pituitary pressing against nearby optic nerves. They may not recognize a gradual loss of sexual function or libido. Only after treatment do some men realize they had a problem with sexual function.
The cause of pituitary tumors remains largely unknown. Most pituitary tumors are sporadic, meaning they are not genetically passed from parents to their children.
A doctor will test for prolactin blood levels in women with unexplained milk secretion, called galactorrhea, or with irregular menses or infertility and in men with impaired sexual function and, in rare cases, milk secretion. If prolactin levels are high, a doctor will test thyroid function and ask first about other conditions and medications known to raise prolactin secretion. The doctor may also request magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which is the most sensitive test for detecting pituitary tumors and determining their size. MRI scans may be repeated periodically to assess tumor progression and the effects of therapy. Computerized tomography (CT) scan also gives an image of the pituitary but is less precise than the MRI.
                
The doctor will also look for damage to surrounding tissues and perform tests to assess whether production of other pituitary hormones is normal. Depending on the size of the tumor, the doctor may request an eye exam with measurement of visual fields.
Women whose ovaries produce inadequate estrogen are at increased risk for osteoporosis. Hyperprolactinemia can reduce estrogen production. Although estrogen production may be restored after treatment for hyperprolactinemia, even a year or 2 without estrogen can compromise bone strength. Women should protect themselves from osteoporosis by increasing exercise and calcium intake through diet or supplements and by not smoking. Women treated for hyperprolactinemia may want to have periodic bone density measurements and discuss estrogen replacement therapy or other bone-strengthening medications with their doctor.