How Tumors Form The body is made up of many types of cells. Normally, cells grow, divide, and produce more cells as needed to keep the body healthy and functioning properly. Sometimes, however, the process goes wrong -- cells become abnormal and form more cells in an uncontrolled way. These extra cells form a mass of tissue, called a growth or tumor. Tumors can be benign, which means not cancerous, or malignant, which means cancerous. How Prostate Cancer Occurs Prostate cancer occurs when a tumor forms in the tissue of the prostate, a gland in the male reproductive system. In its early stage, prostate cancer needs the male hormone testosterone to grow and survive. The prostate is about the size of a large walnut. It is located below the bladder and in front of the rectum. The prostate's main function is to make fluid for semen, a white substance that carries sperm. Prostate cancer is one of the most common types of cancer among American men. It is a slow-growing disease that mostly affects older men. In fact, more than 60 percent of all prostate cancers are found in men over the age of 65. The disease rarely occurs in men younger than 40 years of age. Prostate Cancer Can Spread Sometimes, cancer cells break away from a malignant tumor in the prostate and enter the bloodstream or the lymphatic system and travel to other organs in the body. When cancer spreads from its original location in the prostate to another part of the body such as the bone, it is called metastatic prostate cancer -- not bone cancer. Doctors sometimes call this distant disease. Surviving Prostate Cancer Today, more men are surviving prostate cancer than ever before. Treatment can be effective, especially when the cancer has not spread beyond the region of the prostate.
Scientists don't know exactly what causes prostate cancer. They cannot explain why one man gets prostate cancer and another does not. However, they have been able to identify some risk factors that are associated with the disease. A risk factor is anything that increases your chances of getting a disease. Age Age is the most important risk factor for prostate cancer. The disease is extremely rare in men under age 40, but the risk increases greatly with age. More than 60 percent of cases are diagnosed in men over age 65. The average age at the time of diagnosis is 65. Race Race is another major risk factor. In the United States, this disease is much more common in African American men than in any other group of men. It is least common in Asian and American Indian men. Family History A man's risk for developing prostate cancer is higher if his father or brother has had the disease. Other Risk Factors Scientists have wondered whether obesity, lack of exercise, smoking, radiation exposure, might increase risk. But at this time, there is no firm evidence that these factors contribute to an increased risk.
If tests show that you have cancer, you should talk with your doctor in order to make treatment decisions. Working With a Team of Specialists A team of specialists often treats people with cancer. The team will keep the primary doctor informed about the patient's progress. The team may include a medical oncologist who is a specialist in cancer treatment, a surgeon, a radiation oncologist who is a specialist in radiation therapy, and others. Before starting treatment, you may want another doctor to review the diagnosis and treatment plan. Some insurance companies require a second opinion. Others may pay for a second opinion if you request it. Clinical Trials for Prostate Cancer Some prostate cancer patients take part in studies of new treatments. These studies -- called clinical trials -- are designed to find out whether a new treatment is safe and effective. Often, clinical trials compare a new treatment with a standard one so that doctors can learn which is more effective. Men with prostate cancer who are interested in taking part in a clinical trial should talk with their doctor. The U.S. National Institutes of Health, through its National Library of Medicine and other Institutes, maintains a database of clinical trials at ClinicalTrials.gov. Click here to see a list of the current clinical trials on prostate cancer. A separate window will open. Click the "x" in the upper right hand corner of the "Clinical Trials" window to return here.
Prostate cancer is one of the most common types of cancer among American men. It is a slow-growing disease that mostly affects older men. In fact, more than 60 percent of all prostate cancers are found in men over the age of 65. The disease rarely occurs in men younger than 40 years of age.
Scientists don't know exactly what causes prostate cancer. They cannot explain why one man gets prostate cancer and another does not. However, they have been able to identify some risk factors that are associated with the disease. A risk factor is anything that increases your chances of getting a disease.
- a need to urinate frequently, especially at night  - difficulty starting urination or holding back urine  - inability to urinate  - weak or interrupted flow of urine a need to urinate frequently, especially at night difficulty starting urination or holding back urine inability to urinate weak or interrupted flow of urine If prostate cancer develops and is not treated, it can cause these symptoms: - painful or burning urination  - difficulty in having an erection  - painful ejaculation  - blood in urine or semen  - pain or stiffness in the lower back, hips, or upper thighs painful or burning urination difficulty in having an erection painful ejaculation blood in urine or semen pain or stiffness in the lower back, hips, or upper thighs
Doctors use tests to detect prostate abnormalities, but tests cannot show whether abnormalities are cancer or another, less serious condition. The results from these tests will help the doctor decide whether to check the patient further for signs of cancer. The most common test is a blood test for prostate specific antigen or PSA -- a lab measures the levels of PSA in a blood sample. The level of PSA may rise in men who have prostate cancer, an enlarged prostate, or infection in the prostate.
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following:         - The stage of the cancer (level of PSA, Gleason score, grade of the tumor, how much of the prostate is affected by the cancer, and whether the cancer has spread to other places in the body).    - The patients age.    - Whether the cancer has just been diagnosed or has recurred (come back).        Treatment options also may depend on the following:         - Whether the patient has other health problems.    - The expected side effects of treatment.    - Past treatment for prostate cancer.    - The wishes of the patient.        Most men diagnosed with prostate cancer do not die of it.
Familial prostate cancer is a cluster of prostate cancer within a family. Most cases of prostate cancer occur sporadically in people with no family history of the condition. However, approximately 5% to 10% of prostate cancer cases are believed to be primarily caused by a genetic predisposition to the condition. In many families, the underlying genetic cause is unknown; however, some of these cases are caused by changes (mutations) in the BRCA1, BRCA2, HOXB13, or several other genes. Other cases are likely due to a combination of gene(s) and other shared factors such as environment and lifestyle. High-risk cancer screening at an earlier age is typically recommended in men who have an increased risk for prostate cancer based on personal and/or family histories.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Familial prostate cancer. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Neoplasm - Prostate cancer - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Prostate cancer is a common disease that affects men, usually in middle age or later. In this disorder, certain cells in the prostate become abnormal and multiply without control or order to form a tumor. The prostate is a gland that surrounds the male urethra and helps produce semen, the fluid that carries sperm.  Early prostate cancer usually does not cause pain, and most affected men exhibit no noticeable symptoms. Men are often diagnosed as the result of health screenings, such as a blood test for a substance called prostate specific antigen (PSA) or a medical procedure called a digital rectal exam. As the tumor grows larger, signs and symptoms can include difficulty starting or stopping the flow of urine, a feeling of not being able to empty the bladder completely, blood in the urine or semen, or pain with ejaculation. However, these changes can also occur with many other genitourinary conditions. Having one or more of these symptoms does not necessarily mean that a man has prostate cancer.  The severity and outcome of prostate cancer varies widely. Early-stage prostate cancer can usually be treated successfully, and some older men have prostate tumors that grow so slowly that they may never cause health problems during their lifetime, even without treatment. In other men, however, the cancer is much more aggressive; in these cases, prostate cancer can be life-threatening.  Some cancerous tumors can invade surrounding tissue and spread to other parts of the body. Tumors that begin at one site and then spread to other areas of the body are called metastatic cancers. The signs and symptoms of metastatic cancer depend on where the disease has spread. If prostate cancer spreads, cancerous cells most often appear in the lymph nodes, bones, lungs, liver, or brain. Bone metastases of prostate cancer most often cause pain in the lower back, pelvis, or hips.  A small percentage of all prostate cancers cluster in families. These hereditary cancers are associated with inherited gene mutations. Hereditary prostate cancers tend to develop earlier in life than non-inherited (sporadic) cases.
About 1 in 7 men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer at some time during their life. In addition, studies indicate that many older men have undiagnosed prostate cancer that is non-aggressive and unlikely to cause symptoms or affect their lifespan. While most men who are diagnosed with prostate cancer do not die from it, this common cancer is still the second leading cause of cancer death among men in the United States.  More than 60 percent of prostate cancers are diagnosed after age 65, and the disorder is rare before age 40. In the United States, African Americans have a higher risk of developing prostate cancer than do men of other ethnic backgrounds, and they also have a higher risk of dying from the disease.
Many cases of prostate cancer are not related to inherited gene changes. These cancers are associated with somatic mutations that occur only in certain cells in the prostate.  When prostate cancer is related to inherited gene changes, the way that cancer risk is inherited depends on the gene involved. For example, mutations in the BRCA1, BRCA2, and HOXB13 genes are inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to increase a person's chance of developing cancer. In other cases, the inheritance of prostate cancer risk is unclear. It is important to note that people inherit an increased risk of cancer, not the disease itself. Not all people who inherit mutations in these genes will develop cancer.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of prostate cancer:  - American College of Radiology: Prostate Cancer Radiation Treatment  - Genetic Testing Registry: Familial prostate cancer  - Genetic Testing Registry: Prostate cancer, hereditary, 2  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Prostate Brachytherapy  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Prostate Cancer Staging  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Prostate Cancer Treatment  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Prostate-Specific Antigen (PSA) Blood Test  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Radical Prostatectomy  - MedlinePlus Health Topic: Prostate Cancer Screening  - National Cancer Institute: Prostate-Specific Antigen (PSA) Test  - U.S. Preventive Services Task Force   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care