Prothrombin thrombophilia is an inherited disorder of blood clotting. Thrombophilia is an increased tendency to form abnormal blood clots in blood vessels. People who have prothrombin thrombophilia are at somewhat higher than average risk for a type of clot called a deep venous thrombosis, which typically occur in the deep veins of the legs. Affected people also have an increased risk of developing a pulmonary embolism. However, most people with prothrombin thrombophilia never develop abnormal blood clots. Prothrombin thrombophilia is the second most common inherited form of thrombophilia after factor V Leiden thrombophilia. It is more common in Caucasian populations. This condition is caused by a particular mutation (written G20210A or 20210G>A) in the F2 gene. People can inherit one or two copies of the gene mutation from their parents.
How  Prothrombin thrombophilia is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. For this condition, this means that having one mutated copy of the disease-causing gene (F2) in each cell may be sufficient to cause signs or symptoms of the condition. The mutation in the F2 gene that causes prothrombin thrombophilia is called 20210G>A (also called the 20210G>A allele). An individual can be heterozygous (having the mutation in only one copy of the F2 gene) or homozygous (having a mutation in both copies of the F2 gene). Heterozygosity results in an increased risk for thrombosis; homozygosity results in more severe thrombophilia and/or increased risk for thrombosis. All individuals reported to date with prothrombin thrombophilia who are heterozygous for the 20210G>A allele have had an affected parent. Because of the relatively high prevalence of this allele in the general population, occasionally one parent is homozygous or both parents are heterozygous for this allele. When an individual who is heterozygous for the 20210G>A allele has children, each child has a 50% (1 in 2) risk to inherit that allele and also be heterozygous. An individual who is homozygous will always pass one of the 20210G>A alleles to each of his/her children. If two heterozygotes have children together, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to be homozygous (having 2 mutated copies), a 50% risk to be heterozygous like each parent, and a 25% risk to inherit 2 normal copies of the F2 gene.
What kind of tests can determine if an individual has, or is a carrier of, prothrombin thrombophilia? No clinical signs or symptoms are specific for prothrombin thrombophilia. A confirmed diagnosis of this condition requires specific genetic testing via DNA analysis of the F2 gene, which provides instructions for making the protein prothrombin. The test identifies the presence of a common change (mutation) called 20210G>A. An individual can be a heterozygote (having one mutated copy of the F2 gene) or a homozygote (having two mutated copies). Most heterozygotes have a mildly elevated plasma concentration of prothrombin (which can be measured in a blood test) that is approximately 30% higher than normal. However, these values can vary greatly, and the range of prothrombin concentrations in heterozygotes overlaps significantly with the normal range. Therefore, plasma concentration of prothrombin is not reliable for diagnosis of this condition. Individuals interested in learning more about testing for prothrombin thrombophilia should speak with a genetics professional or other healthcare provider.
Prothrombin thrombophilia is an inherited disorder of blood clotting. Thrombophilia is an increased tendency to form abnormal blood clots in blood vessels. People who have prothrombin thrombophilia are at somewhat higher than average risk for a type of clot called a deep venous thrombosis, which typically occurs in the deep veins of the legs. Affected people also have an increased risk of developing a pulmonary embolism, which is a clot that travels through the bloodstream and lodges in the lungs. Most people with prothrombin thrombophilia never develop abnormal blood clots, however.  Some research suggests that prothrombin thrombophilia is associated with a somewhat increased risk of pregnancy loss (miscarriage) and may also increase the risk of other complications during pregnancy. These complications may include pregnancy-induced high blood pressure (preeclampsia), slow fetal growth, and early separation of the placenta from the uterine wall (placental abruption). It is important to note, however, that most women with prothrombin thrombophilia have normal pregnancies.
Prothrombin thrombophilia is the second most common inherited form of thrombophilia after factor V Leiden thrombophilia. Approximately 1 in 50 people in the white population in the United States and Europe has prothrombin thrombophilia. This condition is less common in other ethnic groups, occurring in less than one percent of African American, Native American, or Asian populations.
Prothrombin thrombophilia is caused by a particular mutation in the F2 gene. The F2 gene plays a critical role in the formation of blood clots in response to injury. The protein produced from the F2 gene, prothrombin (also called coagulation factor II), is the precursor to a protein called thrombin that initiates a series of chemical reactions in order to form a blood clot. The particular mutation that causes prothrombin thrombophilia results in an overactive F2 gene that causes too much prothrombin to be produced. An abundance of prothrombin leads to more thrombin, which promotes the formation of blood clots.  Other factors also increase the risk of blood clots in people with prothrombin thrombophilia. These factors include increasing age, obesity, trauma, surgery, smoking, the use of oral contraceptives (birth control pills) or hormone replacement therapy, and pregnancy. The combination of prothrombin thrombophilia and mutations in other genes involved in blood clotting can also influence risk.
The risk of developing an abnormal clot in a blood vessel depends on whether a person inherits one or two copies of the F2 gene mutation that causes prothrombin thrombophilia. In the general population, the risk of developing an abnormal blood clot is about 1 in 1,000 people per year. Inheriting one copy of the F2 gene mutation increases that risk to 2 to 3 in 1,000. People who inherit two copies of the mutation, one from each parent, may have a risk as high as 20 in 1,000.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of prothrombin thrombophilia:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Prothrombin-Related Thrombophilia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Thrombophilia  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Deep venous thrombosis  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Pulmonary embolus   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Prothrombin deficiency is a bleeding disorder that slows the blood clotting process. People with this condition often experience prolonged bleeding following an injury, surgery, or having a tooth pulled. In severe cases of prothrombin deficiency, heavy bleeding occurs after minor trauma or even in the absence of injury (spontaneous bleeding). Women with prothrombin deficiency can have prolonged and sometimes abnormally heavy menstrual bleeding. Serious complications can result from bleeding into the joints, muscles, brain, or other internal organs. Milder forms of prothrombin deficiency do not involve spontaneous bleeding, and the condition may only become apparent following surgery or a serious injury.
Prothrombin deficiency is very rare; it is estimated to affect 1 in 2 million people in the general population.
Mutations in the F2 gene cause prothrombin deficiency. The F2 gene provides instructions for making the prothrombin protein (also called coagulation factor II), which plays a critical role in the formation of blood clots in response to injury. Prothrombin is the precursor to thrombin, a protein that initiates a series of chemical reactions to form a blood clot. After an injury, clots protect the body by sealing off damaged blood vessels and preventing further blood loss.  F2 gene mutations reduce the production of prothrombin in cells, which prevents clots from forming properly in response to injury. Problems with blood clotting can lead to excessive bleeding. Some mutations drastically reduce the activity of prothrombin and can lead to severe bleeding episodes. Other F2 gene mutations allow for a moderate amount of prothrombin activity, typically resulting in mild bleeding episodes.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of prothrombin deficiency:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Prothrombin deficiency, congenital  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Factor II deficiency   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care