Lysinuric protein intolerance is a metabolic disorder caused by the body's inability to digest and use the amino acids lysine, arginine, and ornithine. Because the body cannot effectively break down these amino acids, which are found in many protein-rich foods, individuals experience nausea and vomiting after ingesting protein. Other features associated with protein intolerance may also occur, including short stature, muscle weakness, impaired immune function, and osteoporosis. A lung disorder called pulmonary alveolar proteinosis may develop in some individuals, as can end-stage renal disease, coma and intellectual disability. Symptoms usually develop after infants are weaned and begin to eat solid foods. Lysinuric protein intolerance is caused by mutations in the SLC7A7 gene. It is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Lysinuric protein intolerance. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Psychotic episodes 5% Alveolar proteinosis - Aminoaciduria - Anemia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cutis laxa - Delayed skeletal maturation - Diarrhea - Failure to thrive - Fine hair - Hemophagocytosis - Hepatomegaly - Hyperammonemia - Hyperextensible skin - Increased serum ferritin - Infantile onset - Leukopenia - Malnutrition - Muscle weakness - Muscular hypotonia - Nausea - Oroticaciduria - Osteoporosis - Pancreatitis - Phenotypic variability - Respiratory insufficiency - Short stature - Skeletal muscle atrophy - Sparse hair - Splenomegaly - Stage 5 chronic kidney disease - Thrombocytopenia - Truncal obesity - Vomiting - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Lysinuric protein intolerance is a disorder caused by the body's inability to digest and use certain protein building blocks (amino acids), namely lysine, arginine, and ornithine. Because the body cannot effectively break down these amino acids, which are found in many protein-rich foods, nausea and vomiting are typically experienced after ingesting protein.  People with lysinuric protein intolerance have features associated with protein intolerance, including an enlarged liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly), short stature, muscle weakness, impaired immune function, and progressively brittle bones that are prone to fracture (osteoporosis). A lung disorder called pulmonary alveolar proteinosis may also develop. This disorder is characterized by protein deposits in the lungs, which interfere with lung function and can be life-threatening. An accumulation of amino acids in the kidneys can cause end-stage renal disease (ESRD) in which the kidneys become unable to filter fluids and waste products from the body effectively. A lack of certain amino acids can cause elevated levels of ammonia in the blood. If ammonia levels are too high for too long, they can cause coma and intellectual disability.  The signs and symptoms of lysinuric protein intolerance typically appear after infants are weaned and receive greater amounts of protein from solid foods.
Lysinuric protein intolerance is estimated to occur in 1 in 60,000 newborns in Finland and 1 in 57,000 newborns in Japan. Outside these populations this condition occurs less frequently, but the exact incidence is unknown.
Mutations in the SLC7A7 gene cause lysinuric protein intolerance. The SLC7A7 gene provides instructions for producing a protein called y+L amino acid transporter 1 (y+LAT-1), which is involved in transporting lysine, arginine, and ornithine between cells in the body. The transportation of amino acids from the small intestines and kidneys to the rest of the body is necessary for the body to be able to use proteins. Mutations in the y+LAT-1 protein disrupt the transportation of amino acids, leading to a shortage of lysine, arginine, and ornithine in the body and an abnormally large amount of these amino acids in urine.  A shortage of lysine, arginine, and ornithine disrupts many vital functions. Arginine and ornithine are involved in a cellular process called the urea cycle, which processes excess nitrogen (in the form of ammonia) that is generated when protein is used by the body. The lack of arginine and ornithine in the urea cycle causes elevated levels of ammonia in the blood. Lysine is particularly abundant in collagen molecules that give structure and strength to connective tissues such as skin, tendons, and ligaments. A deficiency of lysine contributes to the short stature and osteoporosis seen in people with lysinuric protein intolerance. Other features of lysinuric protein intolerance are thought to result from abnormal protein transport (such as protein deposits in the lungs) or a lack of protein that can be used by the body (protein malnutrition).
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of lysinuric protein intolerance:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Lysinuric Protein Intolerance  - Genetic Testing Registry: Lysinuric protein intolerance  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Aminoaciduria  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Malabsorption   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care