Proteus syndrome is characterized by excessive growth of a part or portion of the body. The overgrowth can cause differences in appearance and with time, an increased risk for blood clots and tumors. It is caused by a change (mutation) in the AKT1 gene. It is not inherited, but occurs as a random mutation in a body cell in a developing baby (fetus) early in pregnancy. The AKT1 gene mutation affects only a portion of the body cells. This is why only a portion of the body is affected and why individuals with Proteus syndrome can be very differently affected. Management of the condition often requires a team of specialists with knowledge of the wide array of features and complications of this condition.
 Proteus syndrome is caused by mutations in the AKT1 gene. This genetic change is not inherited from a parent; it arises randomly in one cell during the early stages of development before birth. As cells continue to grow and divide, some cells will have the mutation and others will not. This mixture of cells with and without a genetic mutation is known as mosaicism. The AKT1 gene helps regulate cell growth and division. (proliferation) and cell death. A mutation in this gene disrupts a cell's ability to regulate its own growth, allowing it to grow and divide abnormally. Increased cell proliferation in various tissues and organs leads to the abnormal growth characteristics of Proteus syndrome. Studies suggest that AKT1 gene mutations are more common in groups of cells that experience overgrowth than in the parts of the body that grow normally.
Proteus syndrome is a rare condition with an incidence of less than 1 in 1 million people worldwide. Only a few hundred affected individuals have been reported in the medical literature.  Researchers believe that Proteus syndrome may be overdiagnosed, as some individuals with other conditions featuring asymmetric overgrowth have been mistakenly diagnosed with Proteus syndrome. To make an accurate diagnosis, most doctors and researchers now follow a set of strict guidelines that define the signs and symptoms of Proteus syndrome.
Proteus syndrome results from a mutation in the AKT1 gene. This genetic change is not inherited from a parent; it arises randomly in one cell during the early stages of development before birth. As cells continue to grow and divide, some cells will have the mutation and other cells will not. This mixture of cells with and without a genetic mutation is known as mosaicism.  The AKT1 gene helps regulate cell growth and division (proliferation) and cell death. A mutation in this gene disrupts a cell's ability to regulate its own growth, allowing it to grow and divide abnormally. Increased cell proliferation in various tissues and organs leads to the abnormal growth characteristic of Proteus syndrome. Studies suggest that an AKT1 gene mutation is more common in groups of cells that experience overgrowth than in the parts of the body that grow normally.  In some published case reports, mutations in a gene called PTEN have been associated with Proteus syndrome. However, many researchers now believe that individuals with PTEN gene mutations and asymmetric overgrowth do not meet the strict guidelines for a diagnosis of Proteus syndrome. Instead, these individuals actually have condition that is considered part of a larger group of disorders called PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome. One name that has been proposed for the condition is segmental overgrowth, lipomatosis, arteriovenous malformations, and epidermal nevus (SOLAMEN) syndrome; another is type 2 segmental Cowden syndrome. However, some scientific articles still refer to PTEN-related Proteus syndrome.
Because Proteus syndrome is caused by AKT1 gene mutations that occur during early development, the disorder is not inherited and does not run in families.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Proteus syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Proteus Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Proteus syndrome  - Proteus Syndrome Foundation: Diagnostic Criteria and FAQs   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care