Protein C deficiency is a disorder that increases a person's risk to develop abnormal blood clots. The condition can be mild or severe. People with mild protein C deficiency are at risk for a type of clot called deep vein thrombosis (DVT). A DVT can travel through the bloodstream and become stuck in the lung, which can cause a life-threatening pulmonary embolism. Most people with mild protein C deficiency never develop abnormal blood clots, but certain factors can increase the risk to develop a blood clot. In severe protein C deficiency, affected infants develop a life-threatening blood clotting disorder called purpura fulminans soon after birth. This is characterized by blood clots that block normal blood flow and can lead to death of body tissues (necrosis). Abnormal bleeding can occur in various parts of the body causing purple patches on the skin. Protein C deficiency may be inherited or acquired. The inherited form is caused by mutations in the PROC gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Most people with protein C deficiency do not have any symptoms and require no specific treatment. However, in situations of clot risk such as pregnancy, surgery or trauma, prevention treatment may be indicated. Patients with the severe form of the disease are treated depending on the symptoms. A protein C concentrate is effective in many cases. Liver transplant may cure the babies with this disease.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Protein C deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Subcutaneous hemorrhage 50% Thin skin 50% Thrombophlebitis 50% Abnormality of skin pigmentation 7.5% Abnormality of the cerebral vasculature 7.5% Gangrene 7.5% Pulmonary embolism 7.5% Skin ulcer 7.5% Venous insufficiency 7.5% Abnormality of the eye - Abnormality of the nervous system - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Cerebral venous thrombosis - Deep venous thrombosis - Hypercoagulability - Reduced protein C activity - Superficial thrombophlebitis - Warfarin-induced skin necrosis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Protein C deficiency can be inherited or acquired later in life. Inherited protein C deficiency is caused by mutations in the gene that provides instructions for making protein C, called the PROC gene. These mutations disrupt the protein's ability to control blood clotting. If protein C cannot control blood clotting, abnormal blood clots may form. Acquired protein C deficiency may be caused by large blood clots, liver disease, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), infection (sepsis), and vitamin K deficiency. Treatment with warfarin or certain types of chemotherapy can also cause acquired protein C deficiency.
How  Hereditary protein C deficiency is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that having only one mutated copy of the responsible gene in each cell is enough to cause mild protein C deficiency. A mutated copy of the gene can be inherited from a person's mother or father. People who inherit two mutated copies of the gene have severe protein C deficiency.
 A diagnosis of protein C deficiency might be suspected in someone with a deep venous thrombosis (DVT) or a pulmonary embolism, especially if it occurs in a relatively young person (less than 50 years old) or has formed in an unusual location, such as the veins leading to the liver or kidney or the blood vessels of the brain. Laboratory tests are usually be done to look at the function or quantity of protein C in the blood. Functional tests are usually ordered, along with other tests for abnormal blood clotting, to screen for normal activity of protein C. Based on those results, concentrations of protein C may be measured to look for decreased production due to an acquired or inherited condition and to classify the type of deficiency. If the shortage of protein C is due to an inherited genetic change, the quantity of protein C available and the degree of activity can be used to help determine whether a person is heterozygous or homozygous for the mutation. Genetic testing is not necessary to make a diagnosis.
 Most people with mild protein C deficiency never develop abnormal blood clots and thus do not require treatment. However, people who have experienced a deep venous thrombosis (DVT) or a pulmonary embolism are usually treated with blood-thinning drugs such as heparin or warfarin, which help to prevent another blood clot from developing in the future. Preventative treatment with these blood-thinning drugs may also be considered in those with a family history of blood clotting, as well as in higher risk situations such as pregnancy. A protein C concentrate (Ceprotin) was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 2007 for the treatment of protein C deficiency. High doses of intravenous protein C concentrates can help thin the blood and protect from blood clots. It can also be used a preventative treatment against blood clots during surgery, pregnancy delivery, prolonged immobility, or overwhelming infection in the blood stream (sepsis). Currently, no guidelines exist as to which patients should receive protein C concentrate. It is typically given only at times of increased risk for clotting, or when the blood thinner heparin by itself cannot be safely given because it would lead to an increased risk for bleeding. However, in those with severe protein C who have had severe bleeding complications on long-term blood thinning therapy, protein C concentrate has been used on a regular basis.
Protein C deficiency is a disorder that increases the risk of developing abnormal blood clots; the condition can be mild or severe.  Individuals with mild protein C deficiency are at risk of a type of blood clot known as a deep vein thrombosis (DVT). These clots occur in the deep veins of the arms or legs, away from the surface of the skin. A DVT can travel through the bloodstream and lodge in the lungs, causing a life-threatening blockage of blood flow known as a pulmonary embolism (PE). While most people with mild protein C deficiency never develop abnormal blood clots, certain factors can add to the risk of their development. These factors include increased age, surgery, inactivity, or pregnancy. Having another inherited disorder of blood clotting in addition to protein C deficiency can also influence the risk of abnormal blood clotting.  In severe cases of protein C deficiency, infants develop a life-threatening blood clotting disorder called purpura fulminans soon after birth. Purpura fulminans is characterized by the formation of blood clots in the small blood vessels throughout the body. These blood clots block normal blood flow and can lead to localized death of body tissue (necrosis). Widespread blood clotting uses up all available blood clotting proteins. As a result, abnormal bleeding occurs in various parts of the body, which can cause large, purple patches on the skin. Individuals who survive the newborn period may experience recurrent episodes of purpura fulminans.
Mild protein C deficiency affects approximately 1 in 500 individuals. Severe protein C deficiency is rare and occurs in an estimated 1 in 4 million newborns.
Protein C deficiency is caused by mutations in the PROC gene. This gene provides instructions for making protein C, which is found in the bloodstream and is important for controlling blood clotting. Protein C blocks the activity of (inactivates) certain proteins that promote blood clotting.  Most of the mutations that cause protein C deficiency change single protein building blocks (amino acids) in protein C, which disrupts its ability to control blood clotting. Individuals with this condition do not have enough functional protein C to inactivate clotting proteins, which results in the increased risk of developing abnormal blood clots. Protein C deficiency can be divided into type I and type II based on how mutations in the PROC gene affect protein C. Type I is caused by PROC gene mutations that result in reduced levels of protein C, while type II is caused by PROC gene mutations that result in the production of an altered protein C with reduced activity. Both types of mutations can be associated with mild or severe protein C deficiency; the severity is determined by the number of PROC gene mutations an individual has.
Protein C deficiency is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one altered copy of the PROC gene in each cell is sufficient to cause mild protein C deficiency. Individuals who inherit two altered copies of this gene in each cell have severe protein C deficiency.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of protein C deficiency:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Thrombophilia, hereditary, due to protein C deficiency, autosomal dominant  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Congenital Protein C or S Deficiency  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Necrosis  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Protein C  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Purpura   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Protein S deficiency is a disorder of blood clotting. People with this condition have an increased risk of developing abnormal blood clots.  Individuals with mild protein S deficiency are at risk of a type of clot called a deep vein thrombosis (DVT) that occurs in the deep veins of the arms or legs. If a DVT travels through the bloodstream and lodges in the lungs, it can cause a life-threatening clot known as a pulmonary embolism (PE). Other factors can raise the risk of abnormal blood clots in people with mild protein S deficiency. These factors include increasing age, surgery, immobility, or pregnancy. The combination of protein S deficiency and other inherited disorders of blood clotting can also influence risk. Many people with mild protein S deficiency never develop an abnormal blood clot, however.  In severe cases of protein S deficiency, infants develop a life-threatening blood clotting disorder called purpura fulminans soon after birth. Purpura fulminans is characterized by the formation of blood clots within small blood vessels throughout the body. These blood clots disrupt normal blood flow and can lead to death of body tissue (necrosis). Widespread blood clotting uses up all available blood clotting proteins. As a result, abnormal bleeding occurs in various parts of the body and is often noticeable as large, purple skin lesions. Individuals who survive the newborn period may experience recurrent episodes of purpura fulminans.
Mild protein S deficiency is estimated to occur in approximately 1 in 500 individuals. Severe protein S deficiency is rare; however, its exact prevalence is unknown.
Protein S deficiency is caused by mutations in the PROS1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making protein S, which is found in the bloodstream and is important for controlling blood clotting. Protein S helps block the activity of (inactivate) certain proteins that promote the formation of blood clots.  Most mutations that cause protein S deficiency change single protein building blocks (amino acids) in protein S, which disrupts its ability to control blood clotting. Individuals with this condition do not have enough functional protein S to inactivate clotting proteins, which results in the increased risk of developing abnormal blood clots. Protein S deficiency can be divided into types I, II and III based on how mutations in the PROS1 gene affect protein S.
Protein S deficiency is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one altered copy of the PROS1 gene in each cell is sufficient to cause mild protein S deficiency. Individuals who inherit two altered copies of this gene in each cell have severe protein S deficiency.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of protein S deficiency:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Protein S deficiency  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Congenital Protein C or S Deficiency  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Necrosis  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Protein S  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Purpura   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
D-bifunctional protein deficiency is a disorder that causes deterioration of nervous system functions (neurodegeneration) beginning in infancy. Newborns with D-bifunctional protein deficiency have weak muscle tone (hypotonia) and seizures. Most babies with this condition never acquire any developmental skills. Some may reach very early developmental milestones such as the ability to follow movement with their eyes or control their head movement, but they experience a gradual loss of these skills (developmental regression) within a few months. As the condition gets worse, affected children develop exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia), increased muscle tone (hypertonia), more severe and recurrent seizures (epilepsy), and loss of vision and hearing. Most children with D-bifunctional protein deficiency do not survive past the age of 2. A small number of individuals with this disorder are somewhat less severely affected. They may acquire additional basic skills, such as voluntary hand movements or unsupported sitting, before experiencing developmental regression, and they may survive longer into childhood than more severely affected individuals.  Individuals with D-bifunctional protein deficiency may have unusual facial features, including a high forehead, widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism), a lengthened area between the nose and mouth (philtrum), and a high arch of the hard palate at the roof of the mouth. Affected infants may also have an unusually large space between the bones of the skull (fontanel). An enlarged liver (hepatomegaly) occurs in about half of affected individuals. Because these features are similar to those of another disorder called Zellweger syndrome (part of a group of disorders called the Zellweger spectrum), D-bifunctional protein deficiency is sometimes called pseudo-Zellweger syndrome.
D-bifunctional protein deficiency is estimated to affect 1 in 100,000 newborns.
D-bifunctional protein deficiency is caused by mutations in the HSD17B4 gene. The protein produced from this gene (D-bifunctional protein) is an enzyme, which means that it helps specific biochemical reactions to take place. The D-bifunctional protein is found in sac-like cell structures (organelles) called peroxisomes, which contain a variety of enzymes that break down many different substances. The D-bifunctional protein is involved in the breakdown of certain molecules called fatty acids. The protein has two separate regions (domains) with enzyme activity, called the hydratase and dehydrogenase domains. These domains help carry out the second and third steps, respectively, of a process called the peroxisomal fatty acid beta-oxidation pathway. This process shortens the fatty acid molecules by two carbon atoms at a time until the fatty acids are converted to a molecule called acetyl-CoA, which is transported out of the peroxisomes for reuse by the cell.  HSD17B4 gene mutations that cause D-bifunctional protein deficiency can affect one or both of the protein's functions; however, this distinction does not seem to affect the severity or features of the disorder. Impairment of one or both of the protein's enzymatic activities prevents the D-bifunctional protein from breaking down fatty acids efficiently. As a result, these fatty acids accumulate in the body. It is unclear how fatty acid accumulation leads to the specific neurological and non-neurological features of D-bifunctional protein deficiency. However, the accumulation may result in abnormal development of the brain and the breakdown of myelin, which is the covering that protects nerves and promotes the efficient transmission of nerve impulses. Destruction of myelin leads to a loss of myelin-containing tissue (white matter) in the brain and spinal cord; loss of white matter is described as leukodystrophy. Abnormal brain development and leukodystrophy likely underlie the neurological abnormalities that occur in D-bifunctional protein deficiency.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of D-bifunctional protein deficiency:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Leukodystrophy Overview  - Genetic Testing Registry: Bifunctional peroxisomal enzyme deficiency   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care