Pseudoxanthoma elasticum, PXE, is an inherited disorder that causes calcium and other minerals to accumulate in the elastic fibers of the skin, eyes, and blood vessels, and less frequently in other areas such as the digestive tract.  PXE may cause the following symptoms: growth of yellowish bumps on the skin of the neck, under the arms, or in the groin area; reduced vision; periodic weakness in the legs (claudication); or bleeding in the gastrointestinal tract, particularly the stomach.  A clinical diagnosis of PXE can be made when an individual is found to have both the characteristic eye findings and yellow bumps on the skin.  ABCC6 is the only gene known to be associated with this condition.  Currently, there is no treatment for this condition, but affected individuals may benefit from routine visits to an eye doctor who specializes in retinal disorders, and by having regular physical examinations with their primary physician.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Pseudoxanthoma elasticum. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of coagulation 90% Chorioretinal abnormality 90% Retinopathy 90% Skin rash 90% Thickened nuchal skin fold 90% Visual impairment 90% Bruising susceptibility 50% Myopia 50% Striae distensae 50% Abnormality of the endocardium 7.5% Abnormality of the mitral valve 7.5% Abnormality of the palate 7.5% Abnormality of the thorax 7.5% Abnormality of thrombocytes 7.5% Acne 7.5% Aneurysm 7.5% Blue sclerae 7.5% Cerebral calcification 7.5% Chondrocalcinosis 7.5% Coronary artery disease 7.5% Gastrointestinal hemorrhage 7.5% Hemiplegia/hemiparesis 7.5% Hyperextensible skin 7.5% Hypertension 7.5% Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 7.5% Hypothyroidism 7.5% Intracranial hemorrhage 7.5% Joint hypermobility 7.5% Multiple lipomas 7.5% Nephrocalcinosis 7.5% Pruritus 7.5% Scoliosis 7.5% Sudden cardiac death 7.5% Telangiectasia of the skin 7.5% Renovascular hypertension 5% Abnormality of the mouth - Accelerated atherosclerosis - Angina pectoris - Angioid streaks of the retina - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Congestive heart failure - Hypermelanotic macule - Intermittent claudication - Macular degeneration - Mitral stenosis - Mitral valve prolapse - Reduced visual acuity - Renal insufficiency - Restrictive cardiomyopathy - Retinal hemorrhage - Stroke - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 When considering carrier testing for unaffected relatives of individuals with pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), it is most useful to begin by testing an affected family member for mutations in the ABCC6 gene.  Eighty percent of individuals affected with PXE are found to have mutations in the ABCC6 gene by the genetic testing currently available.  Once the ABCC6 mutations that cause PXE in a family are identified, unaffected relatives may be tested for the familial mutations to determine whether or not they are carriers.
 Unfortunately, there is no cure for pseudoxanthoma elasticum.  Affected individuals are recommended to have regular physical examinations with their primary care physician and routine eye examinations with an eye doctor (ophthalmologist) who is familiar with retinal disorders.  A team of doctors in other specialties - including dermatology, cardiology, plastic surgery, vascular surgery, genetics, and nutrition - may also help with the management this condition.  Individuals should be alert to changes in their vision and should inform their eye doctor of any such changes.  Several therapies may be effective for slowing the reduction in vision in PXE.  Surgery may help to reduce skin symptoms, gastrointestinal symptoms, or severe vascular symptoms in the legs.
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a progressive disorder that is characterized by the accumulation of deposits of calcium and other minerals (mineralization) in elastic fibers. Elastic fibers are a component of connective tissue, which provides strength and flexibility to structures throughout the body.  In PXE, mineralization can affect elastic fibers in the skin, eyes, and blood vessels, and less frequently in other areas such as the digestive tract. People with PXE may have yellowish bumps called papules on their necks, underarms, and other areas of skin that touch when a joint bends (flexor areas). They may also have abnormalities in the eyes, such as a change in the pigmented cells of the retina (the light-sensitive layer of cells at the back of the eye) known as peau d'orange. Another eye abnormality known as angioid streaks occurs when tiny breaks form in the layer of tissue under the retina called Bruch's membrane. Bleeding and scarring of the retina may also occur, which can cause vision loss.  Mineralization of the blood vessels that carry blood from the heart to the rest of the body (arteries) may cause other signs and symptoms of PXE. For example, people with this condition can develop narrowing of the arteries (arteriosclerosis) or a condition called claudication that is characterized by cramping and pain during exercise due to decreased blood flow to the arms and legs. Rarely, bleeding from blood vessels in the digestive tract may also occur.
PXE affects approximately 1 in 50,000 people worldwide. For reasons that are unclear, this disorder is diagnosed twice as frequently in females as in males.
Mutations in the ABCC6 gene cause PXE. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called MRP6 (also known as the ABCC6 protein). This protein is found primarily in cells of the liver and kidneys, with small amounts in other tissues, including the skin, stomach, blood vessels, and eyes. MRP6 is thought to transport certain substances across the cell membrane; however, the substances have not been identified. Some studies suggest that the MRP6 protein stimulates the release of a molecule called adenosine triphosphate (ATP) from cells through an unknown mechanism. ATP can be broken down into other molecules, including adenosine monophosphate (AMP) and pyrophosphate. Pyrophosphate helps control deposition of calcium and other minerals in the body. Other studies suggest that a substance transported by MRP6 is involved in the breakdown of ATP. This unidentified substance is thought to help prevent mineralization of tissues.  Mutations in the ABCC6 gene lead to an absent or nonfunctional MRP6 protein. It is unclear how a lack of properly functioning MRP6 protein leads to PXE. This shortage may impair the release of ATP from cells. As a result, little pyrophosphate is produced, and calcium and other minerals accumulate in elastic fibers of the skin, eyes, blood vessels and other tissues affected by PXE. Alternatively, a lack of functioning MRP6 may impair the transport of a substance that would normally prevent mineralization, leading to the abnormal accumulation of calcium and other minerals characteristic of PXE.
PXE is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. Most often, the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.  In a few cases, an affected individual has one affected parent and one parent without the signs and symptoms of the disorder. This situation resembles autosomal dominant inheritance, in which one copy of an altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause a disorder and the mutation is typically inherited from one affected parent. In these cases of PXE, however, the parent without apparent symptoms has an ABCC6 gene mutation. The affected offspring inherits two altered genes, one from each parent. This appearance of autosomal dominant inheritance when the pattern is actually autosomal recessive is called pseudodominance.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of pseudoxanthoma elasticum:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum  - Genetic Testing Registry: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care