Autosomal recessive pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1 is a disorder of electrolyte metabolism characterized by excess loss of salt in the urine and high concentrations of sodium in sweat, stool, and saliva. The disorder involves multiple organ systems and is especially dangerous in the newborn period. Laboratory tests may show hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and increased plasma renin activity with high levels of aldosterone in the blood. Respiratory tract infections are common in affected children. Treatment involves aggressive salt replacement and control of hyperkalemia. The disorder may become less severe with age. Autosomal recessive pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1 (PHA1B) is transmitted in an autosomal recessive manner and is caused by mutations in the genes coding for the subunits of the amiloride-sensitive sodium channel (SCNN1A, SCNN1B and SCNN1G).
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Autosomal recessive pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Dehydration - Diarrhea - Failure to thrive - Feeding difficulties in infancy - Hyperactive renin-angiotensin system - Hyperaldosteronism - Hyperkalemia - Hyponatremia - Hypotension - Infantile onset - Metabolic acidosis - Pseudohypoaldosteronism - Recurrent respiratory infections - Renal salt wasting - Vomiting - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Psuedohypoaldosteronism type 2 is an inborn error of metabolism. It is characterized by high blood pressure, high levels of potassium in the body, and metabolic acidosis. It is caused by mutations in the WNK1 or WNK4 gene. Treatment may involve dietary restriction of sodium and hydrochlorothiazide.
The most common symptom of pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2 is high blood pressure in adolescents or young adults. In its most severe form, it is associated with muscle weakness, short stature, and intellectual impairment. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Hyperkalemia 90% Hypertension 90% Flexion contracture 50% Nausea and vomiting 50% Abnormality of dental enamel 7.5% Muscle weakness 7.5% Short stature 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Hyperchloremic acidosis - Periodic hyperkalemic paralysis - Pseudohypoaldosteronism - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2 is caused by mutations in either the WNK1 or WNK4 genes. Mutations in these genes cause salt retention and impaired excretion of potassium and acid, leading to high blood pressure, hyperkalemia (high levels of potassium), and metabolic acidosis.
 Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2 is usually diagnosed in adults. Unexplained hyperkalemia may be the presenting symptom and Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2 may be diagnosed after common causes of hyperkalemia have been ruled out. Mildly elevated levels of chloride ion in the blood, metabolic acidosis, and suppressed plasma renin activity are variably associated with this condition as well. Aldosterone levels may vary from high to low.
 Pseudohypoaldosteronism may be treated with thiazide diuretics and dietary restriction of sodium.
Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2 (PHA2) is caused by problems that affect regulation of the amount of sodium and potassium in the body. Sodium and potassium are important in the control of blood pressure, and their regulation occurs primarily in the kidneys.  People with PHA2 have high blood pressure (hypertension) and high levels of potassium in their blood (hyperkalemia) despite having normal kidney function. The age of onset of PHA2 is variable and difficult to pinpoint; some affected individuals are diagnosed in infancy or childhood, and others are diagnosed in adulthood. Hyperkalemia usually occurs first, and hypertension develops later in life. Affected individuals also have high levels of chloride (hyperchloremia) and acid (metabolic acidosis) in their blood (together, referred to as hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis). People with hyperkalemia, hyperchloremia, and metabolic acidosis can have nonspecific symptoms like nausea, vomiting, extreme tiredness (fatigue), and muscle weakness. People with PHA2 may also have high levels of calcium in their urine (hypercalciuria).
PHA2 is a rare condition; however, the prevalence is unknown.
PHA2 can be caused by mutations in the WNK1, WNK4, CUL3, or KLHL3 gene. These genes play a role in the regulation of blood pressure.  The proteins produced from the WNK1 and WNK4 genes help control the amount of sodium and potassium in the body by regulating channels in the cell membrane that control the transport of sodium or potassium into and out of cells. This process primarily occurs in the kidneys. Mutations in either of these genes disrupt control of these channels, leading to abnormal levels of sodium and potassium in the body. As a result, affected individuals develop hypertension and hyperkalemia.  The proteins produced from the CUL3 gene (called cullin-3) and the KLHL3 gene help control the amount of WNK1 and WNK4 protein available. Cullin-3 and KLHL3 are two pieces of a complex, called an E3 ubiquitin ligase, that tags certain other proteins with molecules called ubiquitin. This molecule acts as a signal for the tagged protein to be broken down when it is no longer needed. E3 ubiquitin ligases containing cullin-3 and KLHL3 are able to tag the WNK1 and WNK4 proteins with ubiquitin, leading to their breakdown. Mutations in either the CUL3 or KLHL3 gene impair breakdown of the WNK4 protein. (The effect of these mutations on the WNK1 protein is unclear.) An excess of WNK4 likely disrupts control of sodium and potassium levels, resulting in hypertension and hyperkalemia.
This condition is usually inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases caused by mutations in the WNK1, WNK4, or KLHL3 gene, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. While some cases caused by CUL3 gene mutations can be inherited from an affected parent, many result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.  Some cases caused by mutations in the KLHL3 gene are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Pseudohypoaldosteronism Type II  - Genetic Testing Registry: Pseudohypoaldosteronism, type 2   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1 (PHA1) is a condition characterized by problems regulating the amount of sodium in the body. Sodium regulation, which is important for blood pressure and fluid balance, primarily occurs in the kidneys. However, sodium can also be removed from the body through other tissues, such as the sweat glands and colon. Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1 is named for its characteristic signs and symptoms, which mimic (pseudo) low levels (hypo) of a hormone called aldosterone that helps regulate sodium levels. However, people with PHA1 have high levels of aldosterone.  There are two types of PHA1 distinguished by their severity, the genes involved, and how they are inherited. One type, called autosomal dominant PHA1 (also known as renal PHA1) is characterized by excessive sodium loss from the kidneys. This form of the condition is relatively mild and often improves in early childhood. The other type, called autosomal recessive PHA1 (also known as generalized or systemic PHA1) is characterized by sodium loss from the kidneys and other organs, including the sweat glands, salivary glands, and colon. This type of PHA1 is more severe and does not improve with age.  The earliest signs of both types of PHA1 are usually the inability to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive) and dehydration, which are typically seen in infants. The characteristic features of both types of PHA1 are excessive amounts of sodium released in the urine (salt wasting), which leads to low levels of sodium in the blood (hyponatremia), and high levels of potassium in the blood (hyperkalemia). Infants with PHA1 can also have high levels of acid in the blood (metabolic acidosis). Hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, or metabolic acidosis can cause nonspecific symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, extreme tiredness (fatigue), and muscle weakness in infants with PHA1.  Infants with autosomal recessive PHA1 can have additional signs and symptoms due to the involvement of multiple organs. Affected individuals may experience episodes of abnormal heartbeat (cardiac arrhythmia) or shock because of the imbalance of salts in the body. They may also have recurrent lung infections or lesions on the skin. Although adults with autosomal recessive PHA1 can have repeated episodes of salt wasting, they do not usually have other signs and symptoms of the condition.
PHA1 is a rare condition that has been estimated to affect 1 in 80,000 newborns.
Mutations in one of four different genes involved in sodium regulation cause autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive PHA1. Mutations in the NR3C2 gene cause autosomal dominant PHA1. This gene provides instructions for making the mineralocorticoid receptor protein. Mutations in the SCNN1A, SCNN1B, or SCNN1G genes cause autosomal recessive PHA1. Each of these three genes provides instructions for making one of the pieces (subunits) of a protein complex called the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC).  The mineralocorticoid receptor regulates specialized proteins in the cell membrane that control the transport of sodium or potassium into cells. In response to signals that sodium levels are low, such as the presence of the hormone aldosterone, the mineralocorticoid receptor increases the number and activity of these proteins at the cell membrane of certain kidney cells. One of these proteins is ENaC, which transports sodium into the cell; another protein simultaneously transports sodium out of the cell and potassium into the cell. These proteins help keep sodium in the body through a process called reabsorption and remove potassium from the body through a process called secretion.  Mutations in the NR3C2 gene lead to a nonfunctional or abnormally functioning mineralocorticoid receptor protein that cannot properly regulate the specialized proteins that transport sodium and potassium. As a result, sodium reabsorption and potassium secretion are both decreased, causing hyponatremia and hyperkalemia.  Mutations in the SCNN1A, SCNN1B, and SCNN1G genes result in reduced functioning or nonfunctioning ENaC channels. As in autosomal dominant PHA1, the reduction or absence of ENaC function in the kidneys leads to hyponatremia and hyperkalemia. In addition, nonfunctional ENaC channels in other body systems lead to additional signs and symptoms of autosomal recessive PHA1, including lung infections and skin lesions.
PHA1 can have different inheritance patterns. When the condition is caused by mutations in the NR3C2 gene, it is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. When PHA1 is caused by mutations in the SCNN1A, SCNN1B, or SCNN1G genes, it is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1 autosomal dominant  - Genetic Testing Registry: Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1 autosomal recessive  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hyponatremia  - University of Maryland Medical Center: Hyperkalemia   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care