Blepharophimosis, ptosis, and epicanthus inversus syndrome type 2 (BPES II) is a condition that mainly affects the development of the eyelids. People with this condition have a narrowing of the eye opening (blepharophimosis), droopy eyelids (ptosis), and an upward fold of the skin of the lower eyelid near the inner corner of the eye (epicanthus inversus). In addition, there is an increased distance between the inner corners of the eyes (telecanthus). Because of these eyelid malformations, the eyelids cannot open fully, and vision may be limited. BPES type 2 consists only of the eyelid malformations, whereas  BPES type 1 also causes premature ovarian failure. It is caused by mutations in the FOXL2 gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Treatment typically consists of various eyelid surgeries to correct the malformations.
Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Blepharophimosis, ptosis, and epicanthus inversus syndrome type 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Blepharophimosis 90% Depressed nasal bridge 90% Epicanthus 90% Ptosis 90% Decreased fertility 50% Lacrimation abnormality 50% Myopia 50% Nystagmus 7.5% Strabismus 7.5% Synophrys 7.5% Abnormality of the breast - Abnormality of the hair - Amenorrhea - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Cupped ear - Epicanthus inversus - Female infertility - High palate - Hypermetropia - Increased circulating gonadotropin level - Microcornea - Microphthalmia - Premature ovarian failure - Telecanthus - Wide nasal bridge - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Blepharophimosis, ptosis and epicanthus inversus syndrome type 1 (BPES I) is a condition, present at birth, that mainly effects the development of the eyelids.  People with this condition have narrowing of the eye opening (blepharophimosis), droopy eyelids (ptosis), an upward fold of the skin of the lower eyelid near the inner corner of the eye (epicanthus inversus), and an increased distance between the inner corners of the eyes (telecanthus).  Because of these eyelid malformations, the eyelids cannot open fully, and vision may be limited.  Blepharophimosis syndrome type 1 also causes premature ovarian failure (POF).  This condition is caused by mutations in the FOXL2 gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.
Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Blepharophimosis, ptosis, and epicanthus inversus syndrome type 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Blepharophimosis 90% Depressed nasal bridge 90% Epicanthus 90% Ptosis 90% Decreased fertility 50% Lacrimation abnormality 50% Myopia 50% Nystagmus 7.5% Strabismus 7.5% Synophrys 7.5% Abnormality of the breast - Abnormality of the hair - Amenorrhea - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Cupped ear - Epicanthus inversus - Female infertility - High palate - Hypermetropia - Increased circulating gonadotropin level - Microcornea - Microphthalmia - Premature ovarian failure - Telecanthus - Wide nasal bridge - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
If my daughter inherits BPES from me, will she definitely have the same type as me, or could she have the other type? More than 130 mutations (changes) in the FOXL2 gene have been found to cause BPES. It has been reported that mutations that lead to a significantly shortened FOXL2 protein often cause BPES type I (characterized by eyelid malformations and premature ovarian failure (POF)), while mutations that result in an extra long FOXL2 protein may cause BPES type II (which involves only eyelid malformations). However, in a study published in 2003 in the American Journal of Human Genetics, the authors discussed how their study was the first to demonstrate intra- and interfamilial phenotypic variability (i.e. both BPES types caused by the same mutation). They discuss how assigning an affected family a diagnosis of either BPES type I or II is not always possible because of this. The article also discusses a previous report of menstrual abnormalities and reduced female fertility in two families with BPES type II, suggesting overlap between both BPES types, as well as a report of a family with BPES type I in which the first generations of affected females are infertile while three affected young women in the youngest generation appear to have normal pelvic ultrasound and hormone levels. They do caution that in this family, the early age of the affected women may preclude an accurate prediction of whether they will have POF, since the onset of POF usually occurs at a later age. Approximately 12 percent of people with BPES do not have an identified FOXL2 gene mutation; the cause of the condition in these people is unknown, and therefore there is no information on whether there may be variation within families for these affected individuals.
 Management of blepharophimosis syndrome type 1 requires the input of several specialists including a clinical geneticist, pediatric ophthalmologist, eye plastic (oculoplastic) surgeon, endocrinologist, reproductive endocrinologist, and gynecologist. Eyelid surgery should be discussed with an oculoplastic surgeon to decide on the method and timing that is best suited for the patient. Traditionally, surgical correction of the blepharophimosis, epicanthus inversus, and telecanthus (canthoplasty) is performed at ages three to five years, followed about a year later by ptosis correction (usually requiring a brow suspension procedure). If the epicanthal folds are small, a "Y-V canthoplasty" is traditionally used; if the epicanthal folds are severe, a "double Z-plasty" is used. Unpublished reports have indicated that advanced understanding of the lower eyelid position has allowed for more targeted surgery that results in a more natural appearance.   For a general explanation of these procedures and to locate an eye-care professional visit the Foundation of the American Academy of Ophthalmology and the National Eye Institute websites. To locate a surgeon through the American Society of Ophthalmic Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery click here. Generally, premature ovarian failure (POF) is treated with hormone replacement therapy. There is no specific treatment for POF caused by blepharophimosis syndrome type 1. Hormone replacement therapy is generally estrogen and progesterone and sometimes also includes testosterone. Birth control pills are sometimes substituted for hormone replacement therapy. Although health care providers can suggest treatments for some of the symptoms of POF, currently there is no scientifically established treatment to restore fertility for women diagnosed with POF. Women with POF are encouraged to speak to a health care professional. If you wish to obtain more information and support, you can visit the International Premature Ovarian Failure Association.
Blepharophimosis, ptosis, and epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is a condition that mainly affects development of the eyelids. People with this condition have a narrowing of the eye opening (blepharophimosis), droopy eyelids (ptosis), and an upward fold of the skin of the lower eyelid near the inner corner of the eye (epicanthus inversus). In addition, there is an increased distance between the inner corners of the eyes (telecanthus). Because of these eyelid abnormalities, the eyelids cannot open fully, and vision may be limited.  Other structures in the eyes and face may be mildly affected by BPES. Affected individuals are at an increased risk of developing vision problems such as nearsightedness (myopia) or farsightedness (hyperopia) beginning in childhood. They may also have eyes that do not point in the same direction (strabismus) or "lazy eye" (amblyopia) affecting one or both eyes. People with BPES may also have distinctive facial features including a broad nasal bridge, low-set ears, or a shortened distance between the nose and upper lip (a short philtrum).  There are two types of BPES, which are distinguished by their signs and symptoms. Both types I and II include the eyelid malformations and other facial features. Type I is also associated with an early loss of ovarian function (primary ovarian insufficiency) in women, which causes their menstrual periods to become less frequent and eventually stop before age 40. Primary ovarian insufficiency can lead to difficulty conceiving a child (subfertility) or a complete inability to conceive (infertility).
The prevalence of BPES is unknown.
Mutations in the FOXL2 gene cause BPES types I and II. The FOXL2 gene provides instructions for making a protein that is active in the eyelids and ovaries. The FOXL2 protein is likely involved in the development of muscles in the eyelids. Before birth and in adulthood, the protein regulates the growth and development of certain ovarian cells and the breakdown of specific molecules.  It is difficult to predict the type of BPES that will result from the many FOXL2 gene mutations. However, mutations that result in a partial loss of FOXL2 protein function generally cause BPES type II. These mutations probably impair regulation of normal development of muscles in the eyelids, resulting in malformed eyelids that cannot open fully. Mutations that lead to a complete loss of FOXL2 protein function often cause BPES type I. These mutations impair the regulation of eyelid development as well as various activities in the ovaries, resulting in eyelid malformation and abnormally accelerated maturation of certain ovarian cells and the premature death of egg cells.
This condition is typically inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of BPES:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Blepharophimosis, Ptosis, and Epicanthus Inversus  - Genetic Testing Registry: Blepharophimosis, ptosis, and epicanthus inversus  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Ptosis   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care