Summary : Puberty is the time in life when a boy or girl becomes sexually mature. It is a process that usually happens between ages 10 and 14 for girls and ages 12 and 16 for boys. It causes physical changes, and affects boys and girls differently.    In girls:       - The first sign of puberty is usually breast development.    - Then hair grows in the pubic area and armpits.    - Menstruation (or a period) usually happens last.       In boys:       - Puberty usually begins with the testicles and penis getting bigger.    - Then hair grows in the pubic area and armpits.    - Muscles grow, the voice deepens, and facial hair develops as puberty continues.       Both boys and girls may get acne. They also usually have a growth spurt (a rapid increase in height) that lasts for about 2 or 3 years. This brings them closer to their adult height, which they reach after puberty.     NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
Precocious puberty is when a person's sexual and physical traits develop and mature earlier than normal. Normal puberty typically begins between ages 10 and 14 for girls, and ages 12 and 16 for boys. The start of puberty depends on various factors such as family history, nutrition and gender. The cause of precocious puberty is not always known. Some cases of precocious puberty are due to conditions that cause changes in the body's release of hormones. Treatment involves medications that can stop the release of sexual hormones.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Precocious puberty. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Hypothyroidism 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Elevated follicle stimulating hormone - Elevated luteinizing hormone - Isosexual precocious puberty - Short stature - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Several studies have looked at the long-term effects of treatment with hormone therapy on children with precocious puberty. Long-term hormone treatment has been found to be safe for the reproductive system and helpful in reaching target adult height levels. Additionally, there is little evidence suggesting that long term hormone treatment is associated with psychological or behavioral problems. More studies are needed to determine this association.
Familial male-limited precocious puberty is a condition that causes early sexual development in males; females are not affected. Boys with this disorder begin exhibiting the signs of puberty in early childhood, between the ages of 2 and 5. Signs of male puberty include a deepening voice, acne, increased body hair, underarm odor, growth of the penis and testes, and spontaneous erections. Changes in behavior, such as increased aggression and early interest in sex, may also occur. Without treatment, affected boys grow quickly at first, but they stop growing earlier than usual. As a result, they tend to be shorter in adulthood compared with other members of their family.
Familial male-limited precocious puberty is a rare disorder; its prevalence is unknown.
Familial male-limited precocious puberty can be caused by mutations in the LHCGR gene. This gene provides instructions for making a receptor protein called the luteinizing hormone/chorionic gonadotropin receptor. Receptor proteins have specific sites into which certain other proteins, called ligands, fit like keys into locks. Together, ligands and their receptors trigger signals that affect cell development and function.  The protein produced from the LHCGR gene acts as a receptor for two ligands: luteinizing hormone and a similar hormone called chorionic gonadotropin. The receptor allows the body to respond appropriately to these hormones. In males, chorionic gonadotropin stimulates the development of cells in the testes called Leydig cells, and luteinizing hormone triggers these cells to produce androgens. Androgens, including testosterone, are the hormones that control male sexual development and reproduction. In females, luteinizing hormone triggers the release of egg cells from the ovaries (ovulation); chorionic gonadotropin is produced during pregnancy and helps maintain conditions necessary for the pregnancy to continue.  Certain LHCGR gene mutations result in a receptor protein that is constantly turned on (constitutively activated), even when not attached (bound) to luteinizing hormone or chorionic gonadotropin. In males, the overactive receptor causes excess production of testosterone, which triggers male sexual development and lead to early puberty in affected individuals. The overactive receptor has no apparent effect on females.  Approximately 18 percent of individuals with familial male-limited precocious puberty have no identified LHCGR gene mutation. In these individuals, the cause of the disorder is unknown.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant, male-limited pattern, which means one copy of the altered LHCGR gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder in males. Females with mutations associated with familial male-limited precocious puberty appear to be unaffected. In some cases, an affected male inherits the mutation from either his mother or his father. Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in males with no history of the disorder in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of familial male-limited precocious puberty:  - Boston Children's Hospital: Precocious Puberty  - Genetic Testing Registry: Gonadotropin-independent familial sexual precocity   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care