A pulmonary embolism is a sudden blockage in a lung artery. The cause is usually a blood clot in the leg called a deep vein thrombosis that breaks loose and travels through the bloodstream to the lung. Pulmonary embolism is a serious condition that can cause       - Permanent damage to the affected lung     - Low oxygen levels in your blood     - Damage to other organs in your body from not getting enough oxygen        If a clot is large, or if there are many clots, pulmonary embolism can cause death.     Half the people who have pulmonary embolism have no symptoms. If you do have symptoms, they can include shortness of breath, chest pain or coughing up blood. Symptoms of a blood clot include warmth, swelling, pain, tenderness and redness of the leg. The goal of treatment is to break up clots and help keep other clots from forming.     NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
Major Causes
                
Pulmonary embolism (PE) usually begins as a blood clot in a deep vein of the leg. This condition is called deep vein thrombosis. The clot can break free, travel through the bloodstream to the lungs, and block an artery.
                
The animation below shows how a blood clot from a deep vein in the leg can travel to the lungs, causing pulmonary embolism. Click the "start" button to play the animation. Written and spoken explanations are provided with each frame. Use the buttons in the lower right corner to pause, restart, or replay the animation, or use the scroll bar below the buttons to move through the frames.
                

                

                
Blood clots can form in the deep veins of the legs if blood flow is restricted and slows down. This can happen if you don't move around for long periods, such as:
                
After some types of surgery
                
During a long trip in a car or airplane
                
If you must stay in bed for an extended time
                
Blood clots are more likely to develop in veins damaged from surgery or injured in other ways.
                
Other Causes
                
Rarely, an air bubble, part of a tumor, or other tissue travels to the lungs and causes PE. Also, if a large bone in the body (such as the thigh bone) breaks, fat from the bone marrow can travel through the blood. If the fat reaches the lungs, it can cause PE
Pulmonary embolism (PE) occurs equally in men and women. The risk increases with age. For every 10 years after age 60, the risk of having PE doubles.
                
Certain inherited conditions, such as factor V Leiden, increase the risk of blood clotting and PE.
                
Major Risk Factors
                
Your risk for PE is high if you have deep vein thrombosis (DVT) or a history of DVT. In DVT, blood clots form in the deep veins of the bodymost often in the legs. These clots can break free, travel through the bloodstream to the lungs, and block an artery.
                
Your risk for PE also is high if you've had the condition before.
                
Other Risk Factors
                
Other factors also can increase the risk for PE, such as:
                
Being bedridden or unable to move around much
                
Having surgery or breaking a bone (the risk goes up in the weeks following the surgery or injury)
                
Having certain diseases or conditions, such as a stroke, paralysis (an inability to move), chronic heart disease, or high blood pressure
                
Smoking
                
People who have recently been treated for cancer or who have a central venous catheter are more likely to develop DVT, which increases their risk for PE. A central venous catheter is a tube placed in a vein to allow easy access to the bloodstream for medical treatment.
                
Other risk factors for DVT include sitting for long periods (such as during long car or airplane rides), pregnancy and the 6-week period after pregnancy, and being overweight or obese. Women who take hormone therapy pills or birth control pills also are at increased risk for DVT.
                
The risk of developing blood clots increases as your number of risk factors increases.
Major Signs and Symptoms
                
Signs and symptoms of pulmonary embolism (PE) include unexplained shortness of breath, problems breathing, chest pain, coughing, or coughing up blood. An arrhythmia (irregular heartbeat) also may suggest that you have PE.
                
Sometimes the only signs and symptoms are related to deep vein thrombosis (DVT). These include swelling of the leg or along a vein in the leg, pain or tenderness in the leg, a feeling of increased warmth in the area of the leg that's swollen or tender, and red or discolored skin on the affected leg.
                
See your doctor right away if you have any signs or symptoms of PE or DVT. It's also possible to have PE and not have any signs or symptoms.
                
Other Signs and Symptoms
                
Some people who have PE have feelings of anxiety or dread, light-headedness or fainting, rapid breathing, sweating, or an increased heart rate.
Preventing pulmonary embolism (PE) begins with preventing deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Knowing whether you're at risk for DVT and taking steps to lower your risk are important.
                
Exercise your lower leg muscles if you're sitting for a long time while traveling.
                
Get out of bed and move around as soon as you're able after having surgery or being ill. The sooner you move around, the better your chance is of avoiding a blood clot.
                
Take medicines to prevent clots after some types of surgery (as your doctor prescribes).
                
Follow up with your doctor.
                
If you've already had DVT or PE, you can take more steps to prevent new blood clots from forming. Visit your doctor for regular checkups. Also, use compression stockings to prevent chronic (ongoing) swelling in your legs from DVT (as your doctor advises).
                
Contact your doctor right away if you have any signs or symptoms of DVT or PE.