Acquired pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP) is a rare, acquired lung disorder characterized by the accumulation of grainy material consisting mostly of protein and fat (lipoproteinaceous material) in the air sacs of the lungs (alveoli). Most cases affect adults between the ages of 20-50. The symptoms can vary greatly; some individuals may not show symptoms, while others may experience progressive difficulty breathing and shortness of breath upon exertion. Other signs and symptoms may include a dry, chronic cough; fatigue; weight loss; chest pain; and a general feeling of ill health. In rare cases, the coughing up of blood, rounding and swelling of the tips of the fingers, and cyanosis may be present. Most cases occur for no known reason, but some cases may occur secondary to environmental exposures or underlying diseases; some researchers believe it may be an autoimmune disorder. The treatment varies from case to case depending upon the age of the affected individual and severity of the disease. Acquired PAP differs from congenital PAP, an extremely rare form of PAP that occurs in some newborns.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis acquired. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Cyanosis 25% Alveolar proteinosis - Chest pain - Clubbing - Cough - Dyspnea - Hemoptysis - Hypoxemia - Insidious onset - Pneumonia - Polycythemia - Recurrent respiratory infections - Sporadic - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The treatment of PAP varies from case to case depending upon the age of an affected individual and severity of the disease. Approximately one-third of individuals with idiopathic PAP (of unknown cause) will improve without treatment (spontaneous remission). The other two-thirds may be treated by a whole lung lavage, a procedure in which one lung is cleansed with a salt solution while the other is pumped with pure oxygen. In some cases, the procedure may need to be performed once; in others it may need to be repeated many times over several years. In secondary PAP (due to environmental exposure or an underlying disorder), removal and avoidance of the causative agent (e.g., silica exposure) or treatment of the underlying disorder may improve symptoms. Inhaled GM-CSF (granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor), a blood-stimulating medication, has been shown to improve the condition in some individuals with PAP. Lung transplantation has been used to treat adults with PAP as a last resort. According to the medical literature, in some cases, PAP has recurred in adults who have received lung transplantation.
Pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis is a disorder in which tiny fragments (microliths) of calcium phosphate gradually accumulate in the small air sacs (alveoli) of the lungs. These deposits eventually cause widespread damage to the alveoli and surrounding lung tissue (interstitial lung disease). People with this disorder may also develop a persistent cough and difficulty breathing (dyspnea), especially during physical exertion. Chest pain that worsens when coughing, sneezing, or taking deep breaths is another common feature. People with pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis may also develop calcium phosphate deposits in other organs and tissue of the body. Though the  course of the disease can be variable, many cases slowly progress to lung fibrosis, respiratory failure, or cor pulmonale. The only effective therapy is lung transplantation. In some cases, pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis is caused by mutations in the SLC34A2 gene and inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Intraalveolar nodular calcifications - Onset - Progressive pulmonary function impairment - Restrictive respiratory insufficiency - Slow progression - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Congenital pulmonary alveolar proteinosis is a rare form of respiratory failure that is present from birth. In this condition, a type of protein builds up in the air sacs (alveoli) of the lungs, making breathing difficult. Congenital pulmonary alveolar proteinosis is caused by mutations in the SFTPB, SFTPC, ABCA3, or CSF2RA gene, and it is typically inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Congenital pulmonary alveolar proteinosis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of metabolism/homeostasis - Alveolar proteinosis - Apnea - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Clubbing - Cyanosis - Desquamative interstitial pneumonitis - Dyspnea - Failure to thrive - Heterogeneous - Interstitial pulmonary disease - Pulmonary hypertension - Rapidly progressive - Respiratory distress - Respiratory failure - Tachypnea - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis is a disorder in which many tiny fragments (microliths) of a compound called calcium phosphate gradually accumulate in the small air sacs (alveoli) located throughout the lungs. These deposits eventually cause widespread damage to the alveoli and surrounding lung tissue (interstitial lung disease) that leads to breathing problems. People with this disorder can develop a persistent cough and difficulty breathing (dyspnea), especially during physical exertion. Affected individuals may also experience chest pain that worsens when coughing, sneezing, or taking deep breaths.  Pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis is usually diagnosed before age 40. Often the disorder is discovered before symptoms develop, when medical imaging is done for other reasons. The condition typically worsens slowly over many years, although some affected individuals have signs and symptoms that remain stable for long periods of time.  People with pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis can also develop calcium phosphate deposits in other organs and tissues of the body, including the kidneys, gallbladder, testes, and the valve that connects a large blood vessel called the aorta with the heart (the aortic valve). In rare cases, affected individuals have complications related to accumulation of these deposits, such as a narrowing (stenosis) of the aortic valve that can impede normal blood flow.
Pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis is a rare disorder; its prevalence is unknown. About 600 affected individuals have been described in the medical literature, of whom about a quarter are of Turkish descent. The remainder come from populations worldwide.
Pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis is caused by mutations in the SLC34A2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called the type IIb sodium-phosphate cotransporter, which plays a role in the regulation of phosphate levels (phosphate homeostasis). Although this protein can be found in several organs and tissues in the body, it is located mainly in the lungs, specifically in cells in the alveoli called alveolar type II cells. These cells produce and recycle surfactant, which is a mixture of certain phosphate-containing fats (called phospholipids) and proteins that lines the lung tissue and makes breathing easy.  The recycling of surfactant releases phosphate into the alveoli. Research suggests that the type IIb sodium-phosphate cotransporter normally helps clear this phosphate. SLC34A2 gene mutations are thought to impair the activity of the type IIb sodium-phosphate cotransporter, resulting in the accumulation of phosphate in the alveoli. The accumulated phosphate forms the microliths that cause the signs and symptoms of pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis  - MedlinePlus Health Topic: Oxygen Therapy  - MedlinePlus Health Topic: Pulmonary Rehabilitation  - National Jewish Health: Interstitial Lung Disease  - Rare Diseases Clinical Research Network: Rare Lung Disease Consortium   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care