Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency is an inherited disorder that causes lactic acid and other potentially toxic compounds to accumulate in the blood. High levels of these substances can damage the body's organs and tissues, particularly in the nervous system. Researchers have identified at least three types of pyruvate carboxylase deficiency, types A, B, and C, which are distinguished by the severity of their signs and symptoms. This condition is caused by mutations in the PC gene and inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Clonus - Congenital onset - Hepatomegaly - Hyperalaninemia - Hypoglycemia - Increased serum lactate - Increased serum pyruvate - Intellectual disability - Lactic acidosis - Muscular hypotonia - Neuronal loss in the cerebral cortex - Periventricular leukomalacia - Proximal renal tubular acidosis - Seizures - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
How  Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that both copies of the disease-causing gene in each cell (usually one inherited from each parent) must have a mutation for an individual to be affected. Individuals who carry one mutated copy of the gene are referred to as carriers. Carriers typically do not have any signs or symptoms of the condition. When two carriers for an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be an unaffected carrier like each of the parents, and a 25% risk to not have the condition and not be a carrier (i.e. to inherit both normal genes). In other words, each child born to two carriers has a 75% (3 in 4) chance to be unaffected. De novo mutations (new mutations that occur for the first time in an individual and are not inherited from a parent) have been reported for this condition. This means that in some cases, an affected individual may have only one parent who is a carrier for the condition. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal testing for pregnancies at increased risk may be possible through laboratories offering custom mutation analysis if the disease-causing mutations in a family are known. Individuals interested in learning more about genetic risks to themselves or family members, or about genetic testing for this condition, should speak with a genetics professional.
Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency is metabolic disorder associated with abnormal function of the mitochondria in cells, thus depriving the body of energy. Progressive neurological symptoms usually start in infancy but may be evident at birth, or in later childhood; these symptoms may include developmental delay, intermittent ataxia, poor muscle tone (hypotonia), abnormal eye movements, or seizures. Severe lethargy, poor feeding, and tachypnea (rapid breathing) commonly occur, especially during times of illness, stress, or high carbohydrate intake. Childhood-onset forms of the condition are often associated with intermittent periods of illness but normal neurological development. Prognosis is difficult to predict due to the many causes of the condition, but in most cases of neonatal and infantile onset, prognosis is described as poor. The most common form of pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency is caused by mutations in the E1 alpha gene, and is inherited in an X-linked dominant manner; all other forms are caused by various genes and are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. In addition to directly treating acidosis and providing alternative energy for the body, treatment typically includes dietary supplementation with thiamine, carnitine, and lipoic acids, although not all individuals respond to this therapy.
 Pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) deficiency is usually caused by a deficiency of one or more enzymes or cofactors (such as thiamine) that are needed for an important chemical reaction in the cells of the body. These enzymes or cofactors are part of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex and normally convert (or aid in converting) a chemical called pyruvate to another chemical called acetyl-coenzyme A (CoA), which is one of two important chemicals the body needs to make citrate for the cells. Because pyruvate cannot be converted to acetyl-CoA, there is too much pyruvate in the cells, which then gets used to produce more lactic acid (which is toxic in large amounts) and alanine; there is also not enough citrate being made by the body. Citrate is the first step in another important group of chemical reactions called the citric acid cycle, which then cannot proceed. The body tries to make alternate pathways to produce more acetyl-CoA, but there is still not enough energy made in the body, especially in the central nervous system (CNS). The amount of energy that is deficient depends on the amount of the enzyme that is deficient. The condition is sometimes referred to as pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDHC) deficiency because there is a "complex" of three enzymes normally used in the reaction; when any one or more of the enzymes needed for the above-described reaction are deficient, the condition results. The most common form of pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency is caused by mutations in the X-linked dominant E1 alpha gene; all other causes are thought to be due to mutations in recessive genes.
How  Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency is most commonly caused by mutations in the E1 alpha gene, which is located on the X chromosome (one of the sex chromosomes) and is typically inherited in an X-linked dominant manner. Dominant inheritance occurs when an abnormal gene from one parent is capable of causing disease, even though a matching gene from the other parent is normal. The abnormal gene "dominates" the gene pair. Females have two X chromosomes (one from each parent) and males have one X chromosome from the mother and one Y chromosome from the father. For an X-linked dominant disorder, because one mutated gene is enough to cause the condition, both males and females can have the condition. Because males have no other copy of the X chromosome with a working gene, affected males usually have more severe disease than affected females (who have another X chromosome with a working gene).  If the father carries the abnormal X gene, all of his daughters will inherit the disease and none of his sons will have the disease. If the mother carries the abnormal X gene, there is a 50% (1 in 2) chance for each child (whether male or female) to inherit the disease. The condition may also be caused by a new mutation that first appears in an affected individual, without either parent carrying an abnormal gene for the condition. The other genes that are thought to cause pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency appear to be inherited in an autosomal recessive manner and are not on the sex chromosomes. This means that two non-working copies of the gene that is causing the condition must be present for an individual to have the condition. When an individual has an autosomal recessive condition, each of that person's parents have a non-working copy of the gene and are referred to as "carriers." When 2 carriers for the same condition are having children, there is a 25% (1 in 4) chance for each child to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) chance for each child to be a carrier like each of the parents, and a 25% chance for each child to not have the condition and not be a carrier.
 Genetic testing is available for pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency. GeneTests lists the names of laboratories that are performing genetic testing for pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency. To view the contact information for the clinical laboratories conducting testing click here. Please note: Most of the laboratories listed through GeneTests do not accept direct contact from patients and their families; therefore, if you are interested in learning more, you will need to work with a health care provider or a genetics professional. How is pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency diagnosed? The diagnosis of pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) deficiency may be considered in any individual with early-onset neurological disease, especially if it appears to be associated with structural abnormalities in the brain and unexplained lactic acidosis. When lactic acid (also called lactate) and pyruvate in the blood do not seem to be significantly high, an important clue to the diagnosis may be high concentrations of lactate and/or pyruvate in the cerebrospinal fluid (the fluid that surrounds the brain and spinal cord). Additionally, magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) of the brain may show concentrations of lactate in the central nervous system. Analysis of serum and urine amino acids usually shows hyperalaninemia (high levels of the amino acid alanine). When lactic acidosis is present, other disorders involving pyruvate abnormalities are part of the differential diagnosis. However, in all of these conditions, the diagnosis is based on specific laboratory tests. Specific enzyme tests have been designed which measure both the individual's overall PDH activity, as well as each separate component of the complex (because any defect in the complex may cause the condition). The vast majority of individuals with PDH deficiency are found to be deficient in the El enzyme, but abnormalities have also been detected in other components.
 Treatment of pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) deficiency rarely influences the course of the disease, but goals include stimulating the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDHC), providing alternative sources of energy, and preventing immediate, acute worsening of the condition. However, even with treatment, damage to the central nervous system is common. Lactic acid accumulation may be lessened by giving a high fat/low carbohydrate (ketogenic) diet, but this does not alleviate the neurological symptoms, because structural damage in the brain is typically present from before birth. There is some evidence that a medication called dichloroacetate may reduce the metabolic issues in some patients. The standard of care is to supplement cofactors, which are substances in the body that help the chemical reactions in the cells to occur; these include thiamine, carnitine, and lipoic acid. The individuals with PDH deficiency that respond to these cofactors (especially thiamine) usually have a better outcome. However, giving all of these cofactors to all patients with PDH deficiency is typical in order to optimize pyruvate dehydrogenase complex function. Oral citrate is often used to treat acidosis.
Pyruvate kinase deficiency is a genetic blood disorder characterized by low levels of an enzyme called pyruvate kinase, which is used by red blood cells. Without pyruvate kinase, red blood cells break down too easily, resulting in low levels of these cells (hemolytic anemia). The signs and symptoms of the disease may vary greatly from person to person. However, they usually include jaundice, enlargement of the spleen, and mild or severe hemolysis (red cell breakdown), leading to anemia. In some cases, the problems may first appear while in utero, causing a condition in which abnormal amounts of fluid build up in two or more body areas of the fetus (hydrops fetalis). Newborns may present with prolonged jaundice and anemia. Older children may be pale (due to anemia) and have intermittent episodes of jaundice. Mild cases may escape detection until adulthood. Although the anemia tends to stabilize in adulthood, episodes of anemia may occur with acute infections, stress, and pregnancy. Pyruvate kinase deficiency is caused by a mutation in the PKLR gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion. Treatment remains supportive rather than curative.
 The signs and symptoms of pyruvate kinase deficiency may vary greatly from person to person, but usually include the breakdown of red blood cells resulting in hemolytic anemia, a yellowing of the whites of the eyes (icterus), fatigue, lethargy, recurrent gallstones, jaundice, and pale skin (pallor).  In more severe cases, the first signs and symptoms may appear in utero in the form of hydrops fetalis, a condition in which abnormal amounts of fluid build up in two or more body areas of the fetus. Newborns may present with prolonged jaundice and anemia. Older children may be pale (due to anemia) and have intermittent episodes of jaundice. Mild cases may escape detection until adulthood. Although the anemia tends to stabilize in adulthood, episodes of anemia may occur with acute infections, stress, and pregnancy. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Pyruvate kinase deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Intrauterine growth retardation 5% Nonimmune hydrops fetalis 5% Abnormality of the amniotic fluid - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cholecystitis - Cholelithiasis - Chronic hemolytic anemia - Increased red cell osmotic fragility - Jaundice - Reticulocytosis - Splenomegaly - Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 In most cases, pyruvate kinase deficiency is caused by mutations in the PKLR gene. More than 100 different mutation in the PKLR gene have been detected. Medical conditions, such as acute leukemia, preleukemia, and refractory sideroblastic anemia, as well as complications from chemotherapy, can cause an acquired pyruvate kinase deficiency. This type is more common and milder than the hereditary type.
How  Pyruvate kinase deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion, which means that a child must inherit a gene with a disease-causing mutation from both parents to develop the disorder. The gene that causes pyruvate kinase deficiency is called the PKLR gene that is located on chromosome 1q21.  Although the inheritance is clinically autosomal recessive, most affected individuals are compound heterozygous for two different mutant alleles. It is estimated that approximatly 1 in 100 people carry one copy of a disease-causing mutation in the PKLR gene.  Carriers of one non-working PKLR gene usually have moderatly reduced levels of pyruvate kinase activity but do not develop clinical symptoms. It is possible that carriers of a mutant pyruvate kinase genemay have a protective advantage against malaria in areas where the disease is endemic.
 Yes. GeneTests lists laboratories offering clinical genetic testing for this condition. Clinical genetic tests are ordered to help diagnose an affected person or other family members and to aid in decisions regarding medical care or reproductive issues. We recommend that you talk to your health care provider or a genetic professional to learn more about your testing options.
 Mild cases require no treatment. People with severe anemia may need blood transfusions.  In newborns with dangerous levels of jaundice, a health care provider may recommend an exchange transfusion. Surgical removal of the spleen (splenectomy) may also be necessary to help reduce the destruction of red blood cells. However, this does not help in all cases. With small children, this is delayed as long as possible to allow the immune system to mature. Other treatment is symptomatic and supportive. Someone who had a splenectomy should receive the pneumococcal vaccine at recommended intervals. They also should receive preventive antibiotics until age 5.  An article from eMedicine Journal provides additional information on treatment for pyruvate kinase deficiency at the following link. You may need to register to view the article, but registration is free. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/125096-treatment#showall
Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency is an inherited disorder that causes lactic acid and other potentially toxic compounds to accumulate in the blood. High levels of these substances can damage the body's organs and tissues, particularly in the nervous system.  Researchers have identified at least three types of pyruvate carboxylase deficiency, which are distinguished by the severity of their signs and symptoms. Type A, which has been identified mostly in people from North America, has moderately severe symptoms that begin in infancy. Characteristic features include developmental delay and a buildup of lactic acid in the blood (lactic acidosis). Increased acidity in the blood can lead to vomiting, abdominal pain, extreme tiredness (fatigue), muscle weakness, and difficulty breathing. In some cases, episodes of lactic acidosis are triggered by an illness or periods without food (fasting). Children with pyruvate carboxylase deficiency type A typically survive only into early childhood.  Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency type B has life-threatening signs and symptoms that become apparent shortly after birth. This form of the condition has been reported mostly in Europe, particularly France. Affected infants have severe lactic acidosis, a buildup of ammonia in the blood (hyperammonemia), and liver failure. They experience neurological problems including weak muscle tone (hypotonia), abnormal movements, seizures, and coma. Infants with this form of the condition usually survive for less than 3 months after birth.  A milder form of pyruvate carboxylase deficiency, sometimes called type C, has also been described. This type is characterized by slightly increased levels of lactic acid in the blood and minimal signs and symptoms affecting the nervous system.
Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency is a rare condition, with an estimated incidence of 1 in 250,000 births worldwide. This disorder appears to be much more common in some Algonkian Indian tribes in eastern Canada.
Mutations in the PC gene cause pyruvate carboxylase deficiency.  The PC gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called pyruvate carboxylase. This enzyme is active in mitochondria, which are the energy-producing centers within cells. It is involved in several important cellular functions including the generation of glucose, a simple sugar that is the body's main energy source. Pyruvate carboxylase also plays a role in the formation of the protective sheath that surrounds certain nerve cells (myelin) and the production of brain chemicals called neurotransmitters.  Mutations in the PC gene reduce the amount of pyruvate carboxylase in cells or disrupt the enzyme's activity. The missing or altered enzyme cannot carry out its essential role in generating glucose, which impairs the body's ability to make energy in mitochondria. Additionally, a loss of pyruvate carboxylase allows potentially toxic compounds such as lactic acid and ammonia to build up and damage organs and tissues. Researchers suggest that the loss of pyruvate carboxylase function in the nervous system, particularly the role of the enzyme in myelin formation and neurotransmitter production, also contributes to the neurologic features of pyruvate carboxylase deficiency.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of pyruvate carboxylase deficiency:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Pyruvate Carboxylase Deficiency  - Genetic Testing Registry: Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Pyruvate kinase deficiency is an inherited disorder that affects red blood cells, which carry oxygen to the body's tissues. People with this disorder have a condition known as chronic hemolytic anemia, in which red blood cells are broken down (undergo hemolysis) prematurely, resulting in a shortage of red blood cells (anemia). Specifically, pyruvate kinase deficiency is a common cause of a type of inherited hemolytic anemia called hereditary nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia. In hereditary nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia, the red blood cells do not assume a spherical shape as they do in some other forms of hemolytic anemia.  Chronic hemolytic anemia can lead to unusually pale skin (pallor), yellowing of the eyes and skin (jaundice), extreme tiredness (fatigue), shortness of breath (dyspnea), and a rapid heart rate (tachycardia). An enlarged spleen (splenomegaly), an excess of iron in the blood, and small pebble-like deposits in the gallbladder or bile ducts (gallstones) are also common in this disorder.  In people with pyruvate kinase deficiency, hemolytic anemia and associated complications may range from mild to severe. Some affected individuals have few or no symptoms. Severe cases can be life-threatening in infancy, and such affected individuals may require regular blood transfusions to survive. The symptoms of this disorder may get worse during an infection or pregnancy.
Pyruvate kinase deficiency is the most common inherited cause of nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia. More than 500 affected families have been identified, and studies suggest that the disorder may be underdiagnosed because mild cases may not be identified.  Pyruvate kinase deficiency is found in all ethnic groups. Its prevalence has been estimated at 1 in 20,000 people of European descent. It is more common in the Old Order Amish population of Pennsylvania.
Pyruvate kinase deficiency is caused by mutations in the PKLR gene. The PKLR gene is active in the liver and in red blood cells, where it provides instructions for making an enzyme called pyruvate kinase. The pyruvate kinase enzyme is involved in a critical energy-producing process known as glycolysis. During glycolysis, the simple sugar glucose is broken down to produce adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the cell's main energy source.  PKLR gene mutations result in reduced pyruvate kinase enzyme function, causing a shortage of ATP in red blood cells and increased levels of other molecules produced earlier in the glycolysis process. The abnormal red blood cells are gathered up by the spleen and destroyed, causing hemolytic anemia and an enlarged spleen. A shortage of red blood cells to carry oxygen throughout the body leads to fatigue, pallor, and shortness of breath. Iron and a molecule called bilirubin are released when red blood cells are destroyed, resulting in an excess of these substances circulating in the blood. Excess bilirubin in the blood causes jaundice and increases the risk of developing gallstones.  Pyruvate kinase deficiency may also occur as an effect of other blood diseases, such as leukemia. These cases are called secondary pyruvate kinase deficiency and are not inherited.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of pyruvate kinase deficiency:  - Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center: Hemolytic Anemia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Pyruvate kinase deficiency of red cells  - Johns Hopkins Medicine: Hemolytic Anemia   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency is characterized by the buildup of a chemical called lactic acid in the body and a variety of neurological problems. Signs and symptoms of this condition usually first appear shortly after birth, and they can vary widely among affected individuals. The most common feature is a potentially life-threatening buildup of lactic acid (lactic acidosis), which can cause nausea, vomiting, severe breathing problems, and an abnormal heartbeat. People with pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency usually have neurological problems as well. Most have delayed development of mental abilities and motor skills such as sitting and walking. Other neurological problems can include intellectual disability, seizures, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), poor coordination, and difficulty walking. Some affected individuals have abnormal brain structures, such as underdevelopment of the tissue connecting the left and right halves of the brain (corpus callosum), wasting away (atrophy) of the exterior part of the brain known as the cerebral cortex, or patches of damaged tissue (lesions) on some parts of the brain. Because of the severe health effects, many individuals with pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency do not survive past childhood, although some may live into adolescence or adulthood.
Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency is believed to be a rare condition; however, its prevalence is unknown.
Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency can have different inheritance patterns. When the condition is caused by mutations in the PDHA1 gene, it is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. The PDHA1 gene is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would usually have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. However, in pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency, one altered copy of the PDHA1 gene is sufficient to cause the disorder, because the X chromosome with the normal copy of the PDHA1 gene is turned off through a process called X-inactivation.  Early in embryonic development in females, one of the two X chromosomes is permanently inactivated in somatic cells (cells other than egg and sperm cells). X-inactivation ensures that females, like males, have only one active copy of the X chromosome in each body cell. Usually X-inactivation occurs randomly, such that each X chromosome is active in about half of the body cells. Sometimes X-inactivation is not random, and one X chromosome is active in more than half of cells. When X-inactivation does not occur randomly, it is called skewed X-inactivation.  Research shows that females with pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency caused by mutation of the PDHA1 gene have skewed X-inactivation, which results in the inactivation of the X chromosome with the normal copy of the PDHA1 gene in most cells of the body. This skewed X-inactivation causes the chromosome with the mutated PDHA1 gene to be expressed in more than half of cells.  When caused by mutations in the other associated genes, pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Pyruvate dehydrogenase E1-beta deficiency  - Genetic Testing Registry: Pyruvate dehydrogenase E2 deficiency  - Genetic Testing Registry: Pyruvate dehydrogenase E3-binding protein deficiency  - Genetic Testing Registry: Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency  - Genetic Testing Registry: Pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase deficiency   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care