Long QT syndrome is a disorder of the hearts electrical activity that can cause sudden, uncontrollable, and irregular heartbeats (arrhythmia), which may lead to sudden death. Long QT syndrome can be detected by electrocardiogram (EKG). It can be caused by a variety of different gene mutations (changes). It can also be acquired (noninherited) and may be brought on by certain medicines and other medical conditions.
 Signs and symptoms of the arrhythmias experienced by people with long QT syndrome includes unexplained fainting, seizures, drowning or near drowning, and sudden cardiac arrest or death. You can read more about these and other symptoms of long QT syndrome on the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute's Web site by clicking here. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Long QT syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Arrhythmia 90% Sensorineural hearing impairment 90% Abdominal situs inversus 7.5% Anemia 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Acquired long QT syndrome can be caused by certain medicines and medical conditions. Some medications that cause long QT syndrome include antihistamines and decongestants, antibiotics, antidepressants, and cholesterol-lowering medicines. Examples of medical conditions that can cause long QT syndrome include excessive diarrhea or vomiting and certain thyroid disorders. Inherited forms of long QT syndrome are caused by changes in genes that control the heart muscles electrical activity. Inherited long QT syndrome may be isolated (occur alone without other associated symptoms) or be due to a genetic syndrome, such as Romano-Ward syndrome, Jervell Lang-Nielsen syndrome, Anderson-Tawil syndrome, and Timothy syndrome.
 Long QT syndrome is diagnosed on the basis of electrocardiographic (EKG) findings, clinical findings such as congenital deafness or unexplained fainting, and family history of long QT syndrome or sudden cardiac death. Genetic testing is often performed in families in whom the diagnosis of long QT syndrome has been made or is suspected on clinical grounds.
Timothy syndrome is a type of long QT syndrome. It affects many parts of the body including the heart, fingers, toes, face, and the nervous system. It is characterized by long QT syndrome, although some people with Timothy syndrome also have other heart defects that affect the hearts ability to pump blood effectively. Other symptoms of Timothy syndrome include fusion of the skin between fingers or toes and distinctive facial features. In addition, many children with this syndrome have developmental delay and characteristic features of autism. Mental retardation and seizures can also occur in children with Timothy syndrome. There are two forms of Timothy syndrome. Type 1 includes all of the characteristic features described. Type 2 causes a more severe form of long QT syndrome and does not appear to cause fusion of skin between fingers or toes. All cases of Timothy syndrome appear to be due to changes in the CACNA1C gene. This syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. However, most cases are not inherited from an affected parent, but occur for the first time in a family due to a spontaneous or random change in the CACNA1C gene.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Long QT syndrome 8. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Prolonged QT interval - Sudden death - Syndactyly - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Romano-Ward syndrome is the most common form of inherited long QT syndrome. Symptoms include arrhythmia, fainting, cardiac arrest, and sudden death. There are six different types of this syndrome, long QT 1 through 6. Each type is caused by a change in a different gene. The most prevalent form of long QT syndrome is long QT type 1. Long QT type 1 is caused by changes in the KCNQ1 gene. Romano-Ward syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Long QT syndrome 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the ear - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Heterogeneous - Prolonged QT interval - Sudden cardiac death - Syncope - Torsade de pointes - Ventricular fibrillation - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Long QT syndrome 3. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Prolonged QT interval - Sudden cardiac death - Syncope - Torsade de pointes - Ventricular fibrillation - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.