Many former smokers who are 50 and older say that their main reason for quitting was for their health or due to their doctors advice. Another common reason smokers quit is to be in control of their lives and to be free from cigarettes. A lot of former smokers also said that pleasing or helping a loved one was a big part of their decision to quit. These all are good reasons. The most important reasons for quitting are the ones you decide on for yourself.
Yes. Smoking is the leading cause of cancer in the United States, and it increases the risk of many types of cancer, including -  lung cancer  - throat cancer  -  mouth cancer  -  nasal cavity cancer (cancer in the airways of the nose)  - esophageal cancer (cancer of the esophagus)  - stomach cancer  -  pancreatic cancer (cancer of the pancreas)  -  kidney cancer   - bladder cancer  -  cervical cancer (cancer of the cervix)  -  acute myeloid leukemia (blood cancer).  lung cancer throat cancer  mouth cancer  nasal cavity cancer (cancer in the airways of the nose) esophageal cancer (cancer of the esophagus) stomach cancer  pancreatic cancer (cancer of the pancreas)  kidney cancer  bladder cancer  cervical cancer (cancer of the cervix)  acute myeloid leukemia (blood cancer). If you smoke, you are up to 10 times more likely to get cancer than a person who has never smoked. This depends on how much and how long you smoked.
Summary : Tobacco use is the most common preventable cause of death. About half of the people who don't quit smoking will die of smoking-related problems. Quitting smoking is important for your health.    Soon after you quit, your circulation begins to improve, and your blood pressure starts to return to normal. Your sense of smell and taste return, and it's easier for you to breathe. In the long term, giving up tobacco can help you live longer. Your risk of getting cancer decreases with each year you stay smoke-free.    Quitting is not easy. You may have short-term affects such as weight gain, irritability, and anxiety. Some people try several times before they succeed. There are many ways to quit smoking. Some people stop "cold turkey." Others benefit from step-by-step manuals, counseling, or medicines or products that help reduce nicotine addiction. Some people think that switching to e-cigarettes can help you quit smoking, but that has not been proven. Your health care provider can help you find the best way for you to quit.    NIH: National Cancer Institute