The cornea and lens of your eye helps you focus. Refractive errors are vision problems that happen when the shape of the eye keeps you from focusing well. The cause could be the length of the eyeball (longer or shorter), changes in the shape of the cornea, or aging of the lens.    Four common refractive errors are       - Myopia, or nearsightedness - clear vision close up but blurry in the distance    - Hyperopia, or farsightedness - clear vision in the distance but blurry close up    - Presbyopia - inability to focus close up as a result of aging    - Astigmatism - focus problems caused by the cornea       The most common symptom is blurred vision. Other symptoms may include double vision, haziness, glare or halos around bright lights, squinting, headaches, or eye strain.    Glasses or contact lenses can usually correct refractive errors. Laser eye surgery may also be a possibility.    NIH: National Eye Institute
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Pilodental dysplasia with refractive errors. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal hair quantity 90% Abnormality of dental morphology 90% Anteverted nares 90% Hypermetropia 90% Hypohidrosis 90% Irregular hyperpigmentation 90% Long philtrum 90% Myopia 90% Reduced number of teeth 90% Thin vermilion border 90% Astigmatism 50% Hyperkeratosis 50% Cognitive impairment 7.5% Abnormality of the nail - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Brittle hair - Conical incisor - Ectodermal dysplasia - Follicular hyperkeratosis - Hypodontia - Reticular hyperpigmentation - Sparse scalp hair - Wide nasal bridge - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.