Infantile Refsum disease is the mildest of a group of disorders known as peroxisome biogenesis disorders, Zellweger syndrome spectrum (PBD-ZSS). PBD-ZSS is a group of inherited genetic disorders that damage the white matter of the brain and affect motor movements.  Peroxisome biogenesis disorders, in turn, are part of a larger group of disorders called leukodystrophies. IRD can cause low muscle tone (hypotonia), retinitis pigmentosa (a visual impairment that can lead to blindness), developmental delay, sensorineural hearing loss, and liver dysfunction. IRD usually presents at birth or in infancy. Most individuals with IRD can achieve motor milestones, though they may be delayed, and most individuals can communicate with a few words or signs. Leukodystrophy with loss of acquired skills can occur at any age and may stabilize or progress. Peroxisome biogenesis disorders are caused by mutations in one of the PEX genes and are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.  Life expectancy, medical complications, and the degree of neurological impairment can vary. Survival into adulthood is possible. Adult Refsum disease and infantile refsum disease are separate disorders caused by different genetic defects.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Refsum disease, infantile form. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of metabolism/homeostasis 90% Abnormality of retinal pigmentation 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Hepatomegaly 90% Nyctalopia 90% Short stature 90% Skeletal muscle atrophy 90% Visual impairment 90% Behavioral abnormality 50% Hypertonia 50% Incoordination 50% Muscular hypotonia 50% Nystagmus 50% Sensorineural hearing impairment 50% Abnormality of epiphysis morphology 7.5% Arrhythmia 7.5% Cataract 7.5% Facial palsy 7.5% Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 7.5% Ichthyosis 7.5% Optic atrophy 7.5% Seizures 7.5% Abnormal bleeding - Abnormal electroretinogram - Abnormal facial shape - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Congenital onset - Depressed nasal ridge - Failure to thrive - Flat face - Hypocholesterolemia - Hyporeflexia - Intellectual disability - Malar flattening - Osteoporosis - Polyneuropathy - Rod-cone dystrophy - Single transverse palmar crease - Steatorrhea - Very long chain fatty acid accumulation - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Infantile Refsum disease (IRD) is a medical condition within the Zellweger spectrum of perixisome biogenesis disorders (PBDs), inherited genetic disorders that damage the white matter of the brain and affect motor movements. PBDs are part of a larger group of disorders called the leukodystrophies. The Zellweger spectrum of PBDs include related, but not more severe, disorders referred to as Zellweger syndrome (ZS) and neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy. Collectively, these disorders are caused by inherited defects in any one of 12 genes, called PEX genes, which are required for the normal formation and function of peroxisomes. Peroxisomes are cell structures required for the normal formation and function of the brain, eyes, liver, kidneys, and bone. They contain enzymes that break down toxic substances in the cells, including very long chain fatty acids and phytanic acid (a type of fat found in certain foods), and synthesize certain fatty materials (lipids) that are required for cell function. When peroxisomes are not functioning, there is over-accumulation of very long chain fatty acids and phytanic acid, and a lack of bile acids and plasmalogens--specialized lipids found in cell membranes and the myelin sheaths and encase and protect nerve fibers.. IRD has some residual perixisome function, resulting in less severe disease than in Zellweger syndrome. Symptoms of IRD begin in infancy with retinitis pigmentosa, a visual impairment that often leads to blindness, and hearing problems that usually progress to deafness by early childhood. Other symptoms may include rapid, jerky eye movements (nystagmus); floppy muscle tone (hypotonia) and lack of muscle coordination (ataxia); mental and growth disabilities; abnormal facial features; enlarged liver; and white matter abnormalities of brain myelin. At the mildest extreme of the disorder, intellect may be preserved. Although Adult Refsum disease and IRD have similar names, they are separate disorders caused by different gene defects.
The primary treatment for IRD is to avoid foods that contain phytanic acid, including dairy products; beef and lamb; and fatty fish such as tuna, cod, and haddock. Although this prevents the accumulation of phytanic acid, it does not address the accumulation of very long chain fatty acids, and the deficiency of bile acids and plasmalogens.
IRD is a fatal disease, but some children will survive into their teens and twenties, and possibly even beyond.
Adult Refsum disease (ARD) is a rare genetic disease that causes weakness or numbness of the hands and feet (peripheral neuropathy). Due to a genetic abnormality, people with ARD disease lack the enzyme in peroxisomes that break down phytanic acid, a type of fat found in certain foods. As a result, toxic levels of phytanic acid build up in the brain, blood, and other tissues. The disease usually begins in late childhood or early adulthood with increasing night blindness due to degeneration of the retina (retinitis pigmentosa). If the disease progresses, other symptoms may include deafness, loss of the sense of smell (anosmia), problems with balance and coordination (ataxia), dry and scaly skin (ichthyosis), and heartbeat abnormalities (cardiac arrhythmias). Some individuals will have shortened bones in their fingers or toes, or a visibly shortened fourth toe. Although the disease usually appears in early childhood, some people will not develop symptoms until their 40s or 50s.
The primary treatment for ARD is to restrict or avoid foods that contain phytanic acid, including dairy products; beef and lamb; and fatty fish such as tuna, cod, and haddock. Some individuals may also require plasma exchange (plasmapheresis) in which blood is drawn, filtered, and reinfused back into the body, to control the buildup of phytanic acid.
ARD is treatable because phytanic acid is not produced by the body, but is only found in foods. With treatment, muscle weakness, numbness, and dry and scaly skin generally disappear. However, vision and hearing problems may persist and the sense of smell may not return. Untreated, ARD can lead to sudden death caused by heartbeat abnormalities.
Refsum disease is an inherited condition that causes vision loss, absence of the sense of smell (anosmia), and a variety of other signs and symptoms.  The vision loss associated with Refsum disease is caused by an eye disorder called retinitis pigmentosa. This disorder affects the retina, the light-sensitive layer at the back of the eye. Vision loss occurs as the light-sensing cells of the retina gradually deteriorate. The first sign of retinitis pigmentosa is usually a loss of night vision, which often becomes apparent in childhood. Over a period of years, the disease disrupts side (peripheral) vision and may eventually lead to blindness.  Vision loss and anosmia are seen in almost everyone with Refsum disease, but other signs and symptoms vary. About one-third of affected individuals are born with bone abnormalities of the hands and feet. Features that appear later in life can include progressive muscle weakness and wasting; poor balance and coordination (ataxia); hearing loss; and dry, scaly skin (ichthyosis). Additionally, some people with Refsum disease develop an abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia) and related heart problems that can be life-threatening.
The prevalence of Refsum disease is unknown, although the condition is thought to be uncommon.
More than 90 percent of all cases of Refsum disease result from mutations in the PHYH gene. The remaining cases are caused by mutations in a gene called PEX7.  The signs and symptoms of Refsum disease result from the abnormal buildup of a type of fatty acid called phytanic acid. This substance is obtained from the diet, particularly from beef and dairy products. It is normally broken down through a process called alpha-oxidation, which occurs in cell structures called peroxisomes. These sac-like compartments contain enzymes that process many different substances, such as fatty acids and certain toxic compounds.  Mutations in either the PHYH or PEX7 gene disrupt the usual functions of peroxisomes, including the breakdown of phytanic acid. As a result, this substance builds up in the body's tissues. The accumulation of phytanic acid is toxic to cells, although it is unclear how an excess of this substance affects vision and smell and causes the other specific features of Refsum disease.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Refsum disease:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Refsum Disease  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Retinitis Pigmentosa Overview  - Genetic Testing Registry: Phytanic acid storage disease  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Retinitis Pigmentosa   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care