Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) is a chronic pain condition. It causes intense pain, usually in the arms, hands, legs, or feet. It may happen after an injury, either to a nerve or to tissue in the affected area. Rest and time may only make it worse.    Symptoms in the affected area are       - Dramatic changes in skin temperature, color, or texture    - Intense burning pain    - Extreme skin sensitivity    - Swelling and stiffness in affected joints    - Decreased ability to move the affected body part       The cause of CRPS is unknown. There is no specific diagnostic test. Your doctor will diagnose CRPS based on your signs and symptoms.    There is no cure. It can get worse over time, and may spread to other parts of the body. Occasionally it goes away, either temporarily or for good. Treatment focuses on relieving the pain, and can include medicines, physical therapy, and nerve blocks.    NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) is a chronic pain condition that mainly affects the arms, legs, hands, and feet, but may involve the entire body. CRPS symptoms often begin after an injury. The main feature of CRPS is continuous, intense pain that is out of proportion to the severity of the injury. The pain gets worse over time and often spreads throughout the entire affected area. Other symptoms may include color and temperature changes of the skin over the affected area; skin sensitivity; sweating; and swelling. The underlying cause of CRPS is often not known. Two classifications of CRPS have been recognized based on causalgia. Type I (also known as reflex sympathetic dystrophy), in which there is no evidence of peripheral nerve injury and Type II, in which peripheral nerve injury is present. Treatment aims to relieve pain and often includes different interventions such as topical or oral medications; physical therapy; and/or a sympathetic nerve block.
 Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) usually develops after an injury, surgery, stroke or heart attack. The key symptom of CRPS is continuous, intense pain that is out of proportion to the severity of the injury. The pain gets worse over time. CRPS most often affects one of the arms, legs, hands, or feet, and the pain often spreads throughout the entire affected arm or leg. Other signs and symptoms may include: sensitivity to touch or cold swelling of the painful area changes in skin temperature, color, and/or texture joint stiffness and swelling muscle weakness and/or muscle spasms Symptoms may change over time and vary from person to person. In some people, signs and symptoms of go away on their own. In others, symptoms can persist for months to years.
 The underlying cause of complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) is not well understood. In most cases it occurs after an illness or injury that did not directly damage the nerves in the affected area (Type I). In some cases, it occurs after a specific nerve injury (Type II). The exact trigger of CRPS after an injury is not known, but it may be due to abnormal interactions between the central and peripheral nervous systems, and/or inappropriate inflammatory responses.
 There is no known cure for complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS). Treatment includes a multidisciplinary approach with the aim of controlling pain symptoms. It has been suggested that when treatment is started within a few months of when symptoms begin, improvement or remission may be possible. A combination of therapies is usually necessary including medications, physical and occupational therapy, interventional procedures, and psychosocial/behavioral management. Medications used to treat CRPS may include:oral and topical pain relievers; antidepressants or anticonvulsants (which are sometimes used to treat pain); corticosteroids; bone-loss medications; sympathetic nerve-blocking medications; intravenous anesthetics (Ketamine), and/or intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG). Other therapies used may include applying heat or cold; electrical nerve stimulation; and biofeedback. Interventional procedures may include: trigger/tender point injections; regional sympathetic nerve block; spinal cord stimulation; epiduralclonidine; and chemical or mechanical sympathectomy. Unfortunately, published research studies validating the efficacy of these treatment options are limited and no single drug or therapy (or combination) has shown consistent, long-lasting improvement among affected people. For more information on treatment options for CRPS, click on the following link from the Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy Association of America (RSDSA) http://rsds.org/treatment or the following link on chronic pain through the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke http://www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/chronic_pain/detail_chronic_pain.htm
Because there is no cure for CRPS, treatment is aimed at relieving painful symptoms. Doctors may prescribe topical analgesics, antidepressants, corticosteroids, and opioids to relieve pain. However, no single drug or combination of drugs has produced consistent long-lasting improvement in symptoms. Other treatments may include physical therapy, sympathetic nerve block, spinal cord stimulation, and intrathecal drug pumps to deliver opioids and local anesthetic agents via the spinal cord.
The prognosis for CRPS varies from person to person. Spontaneous remission from symptoms occurs in certain individuals. Others can have unremitting pain and crippling, irreversible changes in spite of treatment.
The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) and other institutes of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) conduct research relating to CRPS and also support additional research through grants to major medical institutions across the country. NINDS-supported scientists are studying new approaches to treat CRPS and intervene more aggressively after traumatic injury to lower the chances of developing the disorder. Researchers hope to identify specific cellular and molecular changes in sensory neurons following peripheral nerve injury to better understand the processes that underlie neuroplasticity (the brains ability to reorganize or form new nerve connections and pathways following injury or death of nerve cells). Identifying these mechanisms could provide targets for new drug therapies that could improve recovery following regeneration. Other researchers hope to better understand how CRPS develops by studying immune system activation and peripheral nerve signaling using an animal model of the disorder.