Relapsing polychondritis (RP) is a rare condition characterized by recurrent inflammation of cartilage and other tissues throughout the body. Cartilage is a tough but flexible tissue that covers the ends of bones at a joint, and gives shape and support to other parts of the body. Ear involvement is the most common feature, but a variety of other areas of the body may be affected, including the costal (rib) cartilage, eyes, nose, airways, heart, vascular (veins) system, skin, joints, kidney, and nervous system. The signs and symptoms vary from person to person depending on which parts of the body are affected. The exact underlying cause of RP is unknown; however, scientists suspect that it is an autoimmune condition. The primary goals of treatment for people with RP are to relieve present symptoms and to preserve the structure of the affected cartilage.
 The exact underlying cause of relapsing polychondritis (RP) is unknown. However, scientists suspect that it is an autoimmune condition. It it thought that RP occurs when the body's immune system mistakenly attacks its own cartilage and other tissues. In general, autoimmune conditions are complex traits that are associated with the effects of multiple genes in combination with lifestyle and environmental factors. There is also evidence to suggest that some people may be born with a genetic susceptibility to RP. Studies have found that people with RP are roughly twice as likely as those without this condition to carry a certain genetic allele called HLA-DR4. "HLA" stands for human leukocyte antigen, which is an important part of our immune system and plays a role in resistance and predisposition (risk) to disease. However, HLA genes are not solely responsible for specific diseases but instead may simply contribute along with other genetic or environmental factors to disease risk. Thus, many people with HLA-DR4 will never develop RP.
 Relapsing polychondritis (RP) is not passed through families in a clear-cut fashion. Most people with relapsing polychondritis do not have affected relatives. Like many other autoimmune conditions, RP is likely a multifactorial condition which is associated with the effects of multiple genes in combination with lifestyle and environmental factors. In general, having a first degree relative (for example a parent, child, or sibling) with an autoimmune condition may increase your personal risk for developing an autoimmune condition. Unfortunately, no specific risk estimates are available for relapsing polychondritis.
 There are no tests available that are specific for relapsing polychondritis (RP). A diagnosis is, therefore, generally based on the presence of characteristic signs and symptoms. For example, people may be diagnosed as having RP if they have three or more of the following features: Inflammation of the cartilage of both ears Seronegative (negative for rheumatoid factor) polyarthritis (arthritis that involves 5 or more joints simultaneously) Inflammation of the cartilage of the nose Eye inflammation (conjunctivitis, episcleritis, scleritis, and/or uveitis) Inflammation of the cartilage of the airway Vestibular dysfunction (i.e. vertigo, hearing loss, tinnitus) In some cases, a biopsy of affected tissue may be necessary to support the diagnosis.
 The primary goals of treatment for people with relapsing polychondritis (RP) are to relieve present symptoms and to preserve the structure of the affected cartilage. The main treatment for RP is corticosteroid therapy with prednisone to decrease the severity, frequency and duration of relapses. Higher doses are generally given during flares, while lower doses can typically be prescribed during periods of remission. Other medications reported to control symptoms include dapsone, colchicine, azathioprine, methotrexate, cyclophosphamide, hydroxychloroquine, cyclosporine and infliximab. People who develop severe heart or respiratory complications may require surgery. More detailed information about the management of RP is available on Medscape Reference's Web site and can be viewed by clicking here.