Mutations in more than a dozen genes have been found to cause Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. The classical type results most often from mutations in either the COL5A1 gene or the COL5A2 gene. Mutations in the TNXB gene have been found in a very small percentage of cases of the hypermobility type (although in most cases, the cause of this type is unknown). The vascular type results from mutations in the COL3A1 gene. PLOD1 gene mutations cause the kyphoscoliosis type. Mutations in the COL1A1 gene or the COL1A2 gene result in the arthrochalasia type. The dermatosparaxis type is caused by mutations in the ADAMTS2 gene. The other, less well-characterized forms of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome result from mutations in other genes, some of which have not been identified.  Some of the genes associated with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, including COL1A1, COL1A2, COL3A1, COL5A1, and COL5A2, provide instructions for making pieces of several different types of collagen. These pieces assemble to form mature collagen molecules that give structure and strength to connective tissues throughout the body. Other genes, including ADAMTS2, PLOD1, and TNXB, provide instructions for making proteins that process or interact with collagen. Mutations that cause the different forms of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome disrupt the production or processing of collagen, preventing these molecules from being assembled properly. These defects weaken connective tissues in the skin, bones, and other parts of the body, resulting in the characteristic features of this condition.
Most cases of Down syndrome result from trisomy 21, which means each cell in the body has three copies of chromosome 21 instead of the usual two copies.  Less commonly, Down syndrome occurs when part of chromosome 21 becomes attached (translocated) to another chromosome during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs and sperm) in a parent or very early in fetal development. Affected people have two normal copies of chromosome 21 plus extra material from chromosome 21 attached to another chromosome, resulting in three copies of genetic material from chromosome 21. Affected individuals with this genetic change are said to have translocation Down syndrome.  A very small percentage of people with Down syndrome have an extra copy of chromosome 21 in only some of the body's cells. In these people, the condition is called mosaic Down syndrome.  Researchers believe that having extra copies of genes on chromosome 21 disrupts the course of normal development, causing the characteristic features of Down syndrome and the increased risk of health problems associated with this condition.