Renal artery stenosis is the narrowing of one or both renal arteries. Renal means kidney and stenosis means narrowing. The renal arteries are blood vessels that carry blood to the kidneys from the aortathe main blood vessel that carries blood from the heart to arteries throughout the body.
                
RVH is high blood pressure caused by RAS. Blood pressure is written with two numbers separated by a slash, 120/80, and is said as 120 over 80. The top number is called the systolic pressure and represents the pressure as the heart beats and pushes blood through the blood vessels. The bottom number is called the diastolic pressure and represents the pressure as blood vessels relax between heartbeats. A persons blood pressure is considered normal if it stays at or below 120/80. High blood pressure is a systolic pressure of 140 or above or a diastolic pressure of 90 or above.1
About 90 percent of RAS is caused by atherosclerosisclogging, narrowing, and hardening of the renal arteries.2 In these cases, RAS develops when plaquea sticky substance made up of fat, cholesterol, calcium, and other material found in the bloodbuilds up on the inner wall of one or both renal arteries. Plaque buildup is what makes the artery wall hard and narrow.
                
Most other cases of RAS are caused by fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD)the abnormal development or growth of cells on the renal artery wallswhich can cause blood vessels to narrow. Rarely, RAS is caused by other conditions.
People at risk for artherosclerosis are also at risk for RAS. Risk factors for RAS caused by artherosclerosis include
                
- high blood cholesterol levels  - high blood pressure  - smoking  - insulin resistance  - diabetes  - being overweight or obese  - lack of physical activity  - a diet high in fat, cholesterol, sodium, and sugar  - being a man older than 45 or a woman older than 55  - a family history of early heart disease
                
The risk factors for RAS caused by FMD are unknown, but FMD is most common in women and people 25 to 50 years of age.3 FMD can affect more than one person in a family, indicating that it may be caused by an inherited gene.
In many cases, RAS has no symptoms until it becomes severe.
                
The signs of RAS are usually either high blood pressure or decreased kidney function, or both, but RAS is often overlooked as a cause of high blood pressure. RAS should be considered as a cause of high blood pressure in people who
                
- are older than age 50 when they develop high blood pressure or have a marked increase in blood pressure  - have no family history of high blood pressure  - cannot be successfully treated with at least three or more different types of blood pressure medications
                
Symptoms of a significant decrease in kidney function include
                
- increase or decrease in urination  - edemaswelling, usually in the legs, feet, or ankles and less often in the hands or face  - drowsiness or tiredness  - generalized itching or numbness  - dry skin  - headaches  - weight loss  - appetite loss  - nausea  - vomiting  - sleep problems  - trouble concentrating  - darkened skin  - muscle cramps
People with RAS are at increased risk for complications resulting from loss of kidney function or atherosclerosis occurring in other blood vessels, such as
                
- chronic kidney disease (CKD)reduced kidney function over a period of time  - coronary artery diseasenarrowing and hardening of arteries that supply blood to the heart  - strokebrain damage caused by lack of blood flow to the brain  - peripheral vascular diseaseblockage of blood vessels that restricts flow of blood from the heart to other parts of the body, particularly the legs
                
RAS can lead to kidney failure, described as end-stage renal disease when treated with blood-filtering treatments called dialysis or a kidney transplant, though this is uncommon in people who receive ongoing treatment for RAS.
Limiting intake of fats, cholesterol, sodium, and sugar can help prevent atherosclerosis, which can lead to RAS. Most sodium in the diet comes from salt. A healthy diet that prevents people from becoming overweight or obese can also help prevent atherosclerosis. People with RAS that has caused decreased kidney function should limit their intake of protein, cholesterol, sodium, and potassium to slow the progression of kidney failure. More information about nutrition for CKD is provided in the NIDDK health topics, Nutrition for Early Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults and Nutrition for Advanced Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults. People should talk with their health care provider about what diet is right for them.