Key Points
                    - Renal cell cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in tubules of the kidney.    - Smoking and misuse of certain pain medicines can affect the risk of renal cell cancer.     - Signs of renal cell cancer include blood in the urine and a lump in the abdomen.    - Tests that examine the abdomen and kidneys are used to detect (find) and diagnose renal cell cancer.    - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options.
                
                
                    Renal cell cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in tubules of the kidney.
                    Renal cell cancer (also called kidney cancer or renal adenocarcinoma) is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells are found in the lining of tubules (very small tubes) in the kidney. There are 2 kidneys, one on each side of the backbone, above the waist. Tiny tubules in the kidneys filter and clean the blood. They take out waste products and make urine. The urine passes from each kidney through a long tube called a ureter into the bladder. The bladder holds the urine until it passes through the urethra and leaves the body.     Cancer that starts in the ureters or the renal pelvis (the part of the kidney that collects urine and drains it to the ureters) is different from renal cell cancer. (See the PDQ summary about Transitional Cell Cancer of the Renal Pelvis and Ureter Treatment for more information).
Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer (HLRCC) is a condition that causes benign tumors of smooth muscle tissue in the skin (cutaneous leiomyomas) and in the uterus in females (uterine leiomyomas, or fibroids). The condition also increases the risk of kidney cancer. Signs and symptoms usually begin in adulthood as skin growths appear on the torso, arms, legs, and occasionally on the face. They tend to increase in size and number over time. About 10% to 16% of people with HLRCC develop a type of kidney cancer called renal cell cancer; symptoms of this cancer may include lower back pain, blood in the urine, and/or a mass in the kidney that can be felt by a physician. Some people have no symptoms until the cancer is advanced. HLRCC is caused by mutations in the FH gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.
 Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer (HLRCC) is caused by changes (mutations) in the FH gene. This gene gives the body instructions for making an enzyme called fumarase which is needed for a series of reactions that lets cells use oxygen and energy (the citric acid cycle, or Krebs cycle). People with HLRCC are born with one mutated copy of the FH gene in each cell. The second copy of the gene in some cells can mutate later on from factors in the environment, such as radiation from the sun or an error during cell division. A mutation can interfere with fumarase's role in the citric acid cycle, which may affect the regulation of oxygen levels in cells. Long-term oxygen deficiency in cells with two mutated copies of the FH gene may contribute to tumors growth and the tendency to develop leiomyomas and/or renal cell cancer.
How  Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer (HLRCC) is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means that having one mutated copy of the gene in each cell is enough to cause symptoms of the condition. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutated copy of the gene from an affected parent. Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and that occur for the first time in in the affected individual. When an individual with an autosomal dominant condition has children, each child has a 50% (1 in 2) risk to inherit the mutated gene. This is the case regardless of which parent has the condition.
 Skin growths (cutaneous leiomyomas) associated with hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer (HLRCC) should be examined by a dermatologist. Treatment of these may include surgery to remove a painful growth; cryoablation and/or lasers; and/or medications such as calcium channel blockers, alpha blockers, nitroglycerin, antidepressants, and/or antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), which have been reported to reduce pain. Uterine fibroids should be evaluated by a gynecologist. These are typically treated in the same manner as those that occur in the general population. However, most women with HLRCC need medication and/or surgical removal of the fibroids (myomectomy) at a younger age. Medications may include gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists (GnRHa), antihormonal drugs, and pain relievers. Hysterectomy should be performed only when necessary. Early detection of kidney tumors in HLRCC is important because they grow aggressively. Total nephrectomy may be strongly considered in individuals with a detectable renal mass.
Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer (HLRCC) is a disorder in which affected individuals tend to develop benign tumors containing smooth muscle tissue (leiomyomas) in the skin and, in females, the uterus. This condition also increases the risk of kidney cancer.  In this disorder, growths on the skin (cutaneous leiomyomas) typically develop in the third decade of life. Most of these growths arise from the tiny muscles around the hair follicles that cause "goosebumps". They appear as bumps or nodules on the trunk, arms, legs, and occasionally on the face. Cutaneous leiomyomas may be the same color as the surrounding skin, or they may be darker. Some affected individuals have no cutaneous leiomyomas or only a few, but the growths tend to increase in size and number over time. Cutaneous leiomyomas are often more sensitive than the surrounding skin to cold or light touch, and may be painful.  Most women with HLRCC also develop uterine leiomyomas (fibroids). While uterine fibroids are very common in the general population, women with HLRCC tend to have numerous large fibroids that appear earlier than in the general population.  Approximately 10 percent to 16 percent of people with HLRCC develop a type of kidney cancer called renal cell cancer. The signs and symptoms of renal cell cancer may include lower back pain, blood in the urine, or a mass in the kidney that can be felt upon physical examination. Some people with renal cell cancer have no symptoms until the disease is advanced. The average age at which people with HLRCC are diagnosed with kidney cancer is in their forties.  This disorder, especially if it appears in individuals or families without renal cell cancer, is also sometimes called multiple cutaneous leiomyomatosis (MCL) or multiple cutaneous and uterine leiomyomatosis (MCUL).
HLRCC has been reported in approximately 100 families worldwide. Its prevalence is unknown.
Mutations in the FH gene cause hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer. The FH gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called fumarase (also known as fumarate hydratase). This enzyme participates in an important series of reactions known as the citric acid cycle or Krebs cycle, which allows cells to use oxygen and generate energy. Specifically, fumarase helps convert a molecule called fumarate to a molecule called malate.  People with HLRCC are born with one mutated copy of the FH gene in each cell. The second copy of the FH gene in certain cells may also acquire mutations as a result of environmental factors such as ultraviolet radiation from the sun or a mistake that occurs as DNA copies itself during cell division.  FH gene mutations may interfere with the enzyme's role in the citric acid cycle, resulting in a buildup of fumarate. Researchers believe that the excess fumarate may interfere with the regulation of oxygen levels in the cell. Chronic oxygen deficiency (hypoxia) in cells with two mutated copies of the FH gene may encourage tumor formation and result in the tendency to develop leiomyomas and renal cell cancer.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of HLRCC:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Hereditary Leiomyomatosis and Renal Cell Cancer  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Renal Cell Carcinoma   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care