Urinary retention is the inability to empty the bladder completely. Urinary retention can be acute or chronic. Acute urinary retention happens suddenly and lasts only a short time. People with acute urinary retention cannot urinate at all, even though they have a full bladder. Acute urinary retention, a potentially life-threatening medical condition, requires immediate emergency treatment. Acute urinary retention can cause great discomfort or pain.
                
Chronic urinary retention can be a long-lasting medical condition. People with chronic urinary retention can urinate. However, they do not completely empty all of the urine from their bladders. Often people are not even aware they have this condition until they develop another problem, such as urinary incontinenceloss of bladder control, resulting in the accidental loss of urineor a urinary tract infection (UTI), an illness caused by harmful bacteria growing in the urinary tract.
Urinary retention in men becomes more common with age.
                
- In men 40 to 83 years old, the overall incidence of urinary retention is 4.5 to 6.8 per 1,000 men.2  - For men in their 70s, the overall incidence increases to 100 per 1,000 men.2  - For men in their 80s, the incidence of acute urinary retention is 300 per 1,000 men.2
                
Urinary retention in women is less common, though not rare.3 The incidence of urinary retention in women has not been well studied because researchers have primarily thought of urinary retention as a mans problem related to the prostate.4
The symptoms of acute urinary retention may include the following and require immediate medical attention:
                
- inability to urinate  - painful, urgent need to urinate  - pain or discomfort in the lower abdomen  - bloating of the lower abdomen
                
The symptoms of chronic urinary retention may include
                
- urinary frequencyurination eight or more times a day  - trouble beginning a urine stream  - a weak or an interrupted urine stream  - an urgent need to urinate with little success when trying to urinate  - feeling the need to urinate after finishing urination  - mild and constant discomfort in the lower abdomen and urinary tract
                
Some people with chronic urinary retention may not have symptoms that lead them to seek medical care. People who are unaware they have chronic urinary retention may have a higher chance of developing complications.
                

                
When to Seek Medical Care   A person who has any of the following symptoms should see a health care provider right away:   - complete inability to urinate   - great discomfort or pain in the lower abdomen and urinary tract
Complications of urinary retention and its treatments may include
                
- UTIs  - bladder damage  - kidney damage  - urinary incontinence after prostate, tumor, or cancer surgery
                
UTIs. Urine is normally sterile, and the normal flow of urine usually prevents bacteria from infecting the urinary tract. With urinary retention, the abnormal urine flow gives bacteria at the opening of the urethra a chance to infect the urinary tract.
                
Bladder damage. If the bladder becomes stretched too far or for long periods, the muscles may be permanently damaged and lose their ability to contract.
                
Kidney damage. In some people, urinary retention causes urine to flow backward into the kidneys. This backward flow, called reflux, may damage or scar the kidneys.
                
Urinary incontinence after prostate, tumor, or cancer surgery. Transurethral surgery to treat benign prostatic hyperplasia may result in urinary incontinence in some men. This problem is often temporary. Most men recover their bladder control in a few weeks or months after surgery. Surgery to remove tumors or cancerous tissue in the bladder, prostate, or urethra may also result in urinary incontinence.
People can prevent urinary retention before it occurs by treating some of the potential causes. For example, men with benign prostatic hyperplasia should take prostate medications as prescribed by their health care provider. Men with benign prostatic hyperplasia should avoid medications associated with urinary retention, such as over-the-counter cold and allergy medications that contain decongestants. Women with mild cystocele or rectocele may prevent urinary retention by doing exercises to strengthen the pelvic muscles. In most cases, dietary and lifestyle changes will help prevent urinary retention caused by constipation. People whose constipation continues should see a health care provider.
                
More information about exercises to strengthen the pelvic muscles is provided in the NIDDK health topic, Kegel Exercise Tips.
Researchers have not found that eating, diet, and nutrition play a role in causing or preventing urinary retention.