Can Cause Vision Loss, Blindness Diabetic retinopathy is a complication of diabetes and a leading cause of blindness. It occurs when diabetes damages the tiny blood vessels inside the retina in the back of the eye. A healthy retina is necessary for good vision. If you have diabetic retinopathy, at first you may notice no changes to your vision. But over time, diabetic retinopathy can get worse and cause vision loss. Diabetic retinopathy usually affects both eyes. Four Stages The four stages of diabetic retinopathy are - mild nonproliferative retinopathy  - moderate nonproliferative retinopathy  - severe nonproliferative retinopathy  - proliferative retinopathy. mild nonproliferative retinopathy moderate nonproliferative retinopathy severe nonproliferative retinopathy proliferative retinopathy. The first stage is mild nonproliferative retinopathy. At this earliest stage, there are small areas of balloon-like swelling in the retina's tiny blood vessels. The second stage is moderate nonproliferative retinopathy. As the disease progresses, some blood vessels that nourish the retina are blocked. The third stage is severe nonproliferative retinopathy. Many more blood vessels are blocked, depriving several areas of the retina of their blood supply. These areas send signals to the body to grow new blood vessels for nourishment. The fourth stage is proliferative retinopathy. At this advanced stage, the signals sent by the retina for nourishment cause the growth of new blood vessels. These new blood vessels are abnormal and fragile. The new blood vessels grow along the retina and along the surface of the clear, vitreous gel that fills the inside of the eye. By themselves, these blood vessels do not cause symptoms or vision loss. However, they have thin, fragile walls. If they leak blood, severe vision loss and even blindness can result. Other Diabetic Eye Diseases In addition to diabetic retinopathy, other diabetic eye diseases that people with diabetes may face are cataract and glaucoma. See this graphic for a quick overview of diabetic eye disease, including how many people it affects, whos at risk, what to do if you have it, and how to learn more.
 All people with diabetes -- both type 1 and type 2 -- are at risk for diabetic retinopathy. People with diabetes are also at increased risk for cataract and glaucoma. That's why everyone with diabetes should get a comprehensive dilated eye exam at least once a year. Between 40 to 45 percent of Americans diagnosed with diabetes have some stage of diabetic retinopathy. If you have diabetic retinopathy, your doctor can recommend treatment to help prevent its progression. How Vision Loss Occurs Blood vessels damaged from diabetic retinopathy can cause vision loss in two ways. Fragile, abnormal blood vessels can develop and leak blood into the center of the eye, blurring vision. This is proliferative retinopathy and is the fourth and most advanced stage of the disease. Fluid can leak into the center of the macula, the part of the eye where sharp, straight-ahead vision occurs. The fluid makes the macula swell, blurring vision. This condition is called macular edema. Macular edema can occur at any stage of diabetic retinopathy, although it is more likely to occur as the disease progresses. About half of the people with proliferative retinopathy also have macular edema. Macular edema can occur at any stage of diabetic retinopathy, although it is more likely to occur as the disease progresses. About half of the people with proliferative retinopathy also have macular edema. Have Dilated Eye Exams The National Eye Institute (NEI) urges everyone with diabetes to have a comprehensive dilated eye exam at least once a year. If you have diabetic retinopathy, you may need an eye exam more often. People with proliferative retinopathy can reduce their risk of blindness by 95 percent with timely treatment and appropriate follow-up care.  Watch an animation to see what a comprehensive dilated eye exam includes.
All people with diabetes -- both type 1 and type 2 -- are at risk for diabetic retinopathy. People with diabetes are also at increased risk for cataract and glaucoma. That's why everyone with diabetes should get a comprehensive dilated eye exam at least once a year. Between 40 to 45 percent of Americans diagnosed with diabetes have some stage of diabetic retinopathy. If you have diabetic retinopathy, your doctor can recommend treatment to help prevent its progression. See how to find an eye care professional.
Diabetic retinopathy often has no early warning signs. Don't wait for symptoms. Be sure to have a comprehensive dilated eye exam at least once a year.  Learn more about a comprehensive dilated eye exam.
Research found that that prompt treatment of macular edema with anti-VEGF drugs, with or without laser treatment, resulted in better vision than laser treatment alone or steroid injections. When injected into the eye, these drugs reduce fluid leakage and interfere with the growth of new blood vessels in the retina. In some cases, focal laser treatment is used along with the eye injections. Your doctor places up to several hundred small laser burns in the areas of the retina around the macula that are leaking. These burns slow the leakage of fluid and reduce the amount of fluid in the retina. The surgery is usually completed in one session. Further treatment may be needed.
If you have diabetes, get a comprehensive dilated eye exam at least once a year. Proliferative retinopathy can develop without symptoms. If it gets to this advanced stage, you are at high risk for vision loss or even blindness. Macular edema can develop without symptoms at any of the four stages of diabetic retinopathy. You can develop both proliferative retinopathy and macular edema and still see fine. However, you are at high risk for vision loss. Your eye care professional can tell if you have macular edema or any stage of diabetic retinopathy. Whether or not you have symptoms, early detection and timely treatment can prevent vision loss.  See this glossary for basic terms about diabetic retinopathy.