Key Points
                    - Retinoblastoma is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the retina.    - Retinoblastoma occurs in heritable and nonheritable forms.     -  Treatment for both forms of retinoblastoma should include genetic counseling.    - Children with a family history of retinoblastoma should have eye exams to check for retinoblastoma.     - A child who has heritable retinoblastoma has an increased risk of trilateral retinoblastoma and other cancers.    - Signs and symptoms of retinoblastoma include "white pupil" and eye pain or redness.     - Tests that examine the retina are used to detect (find) and diagnose retinoblastoma.    - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options.
                
                
                    Retinoblastoma is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the retina.
                    The retina is the nerve tissue that lines the inside of the back of the eye. The retina senses light and sends images to the brain by way of the optic nerve.      Although retinoblastoma may occur at any age, it occurs most often in children younger than 2 years. The cancer may be in one eye (unilateral) or in both eyes (bilateral). Retinoblastoma rarely spreads from the eye to nearby tissue or other parts of the body.    Cavitary retinoblastoma is a rare type of retinoblastoma in which cavities (hollow spaces) form within the tumor.
                
                
                    Treatment for both forms of retinoblastoma should include genetic counseling.
                    Parents should receive genetic counseling (a discussion with a trained professional about the risk of genetic diseases) to discuss genetic testing to check for a mutation (change) in the RB1 gene. Genetic counseling also includes a discussion of the risk of retinoblastoma for the child and the child's brothers or sisters.
A child who has heritable retinoblastoma has an increased risk of trilateral retinoblastoma and other cancers. A child with heritable retinoblastoma has an increased risk of a pineal tumor in the brain. When retinoblastoma and a brain tumor occur at the same time, it is called trilateral retinoblastoma. The brain tumor is usually diagnosed between 20 and 36 months of age. Regular screening using MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) may be done for a child thought to have heritable retinoblastoma or for a child with retinoblastoma in one eye and a family history of the disease. CT (computerized tomography) scans are usually not used for routine screening in order to avoid exposing the child to ionizing radiation.    Heritable retinoblastoma also increases the child's risk of other types of cancer such as lung cancer, bladder cancer, or melanoma in later years. Regular follow-up exams are important.
These and other signs and symptoms may be caused by retinoblastoma or by other conditions. Check with a doctor if your child has any of the following:         -  Pupil of the eye appears white instead of red when light shines into it. This may be seen in flash photographs of the child.    - Eyes appear to be looking in different directions (lazy eye).    - Pain or redness in the eye.    -  Infection around the eye.     - Eyeball is larger than normal.     - Colored part of the eye and pupil look cloudy.
The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following:         - Whether the cancer is in one or both eyes.    - The size and number of tumors.    - Whether the tumor has spread to the area around the eye, to the brain, or to other parts of the body.    - Whether there are symptoms at the time of diagnosis, for trilateral retinoblastoma.    - The age of the child.    - How likely it is that vision can be saved in one or both eyes.    - Whether a second type of cancer has formed.
Retinoblastoma is a rare type of eye cancer that usually develops in early childhood, typically before the age of 5. This form of cancer develops in the retina, which is the specialized light-sensitive tissue at the back of the eye that detects light and color.  In most children with retinoblastoma, the disease affects only one eye. However, one out of three children with retinoblastoma develops cancer in both eyes. The most common first sign of retinoblastoma is a visible whiteness in the pupil called "cat's eye reflex" or leukocoria. This unusual whiteness is particularly noticeable in photographs taken with a flash. Other signs and symptoms of retinoblastoma include crossed eyes or eyes that do not point in the same direction (strabismus); persistent eye pain, redness, or irritation; and blindness or poor vision in the affected eye(s).  Retinoblastoma is often curable when it is diagnosed early. However, if it is not treated promptly, this cancer can spread beyond the eye to other parts of the body. This advanced form of retinoblastoma can be life-threatening.  When retinoblastoma is associated with a gene mutation that occurs in all of the body's cells, it is known as germinal retinoblastoma. People with this form of retinoblastoma also have an increased risk of developing several other cancers outside the eye. Specifically, they are more likely to develop a cancer of the pineal gland in the brain (pinealoma), a type of bone cancer known as osteosarcoma, cancers of soft tissues such as muscle, and an aggressive form of skin cancer called melanoma.
Retinoblastoma is diagnosed in 250 to 350 children per year in the United States. It accounts for about 4 percent of all cancers in children younger than 15 years.
Mutations in the RB1 gene are responsible for most cases of retinoblastoma. RB1 is a tumor suppressor gene, which means that it normally regulates cell growth and keeps cells from dividing too rapidly or in an uncontrolled way. Most mutations in the RB1 gene prevent it from making any functional protein, so it is unable to regulate cell division effectively. As a result, certain cells in the retina can divide uncontrollably to form a cancerous tumor. Some studies suggest that additional genetic changes can influence the development of retinoblastoma; these changes may help explain variations in the development and growth of tumors in different people.  A small percentage of retinoblastomas are caused by deletions in the region of chromosome 13 that contains the RB1 gene. Because these chromosomal changes involve several genes in addition to RB1, affected children usually also have intellectual disability, slow growth, and distinctive facial features (such as prominent eyebrows, a short nose with a broad nasal bridge, and ear abnormalities).
Researchers estimate that 40 percent of all retinoblastomas are germinal, which means that RB1 mutations occur in all of the body's cells, including reproductive cells (sperm or eggs). People with germinal retinoblastoma may have a family history of the disease, and they are at risk of passing on the mutated RB1 gene to the next generation. The other 60 percent of retinoblastomas are non-germinal, which means that RB1 mutations occur only in the eye and cannot be passed to the next generation.  In germinal retinoblastoma, mutations in the RB1 gene appear to be inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. Autosomal dominant inheritance suggests that one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to increase cancer risk. A person with germinal retinoblastoma may inherit an altered copy of the gene from one parent, or the altered gene may be the result of a new mutation that occurs in an egg or sperm cell or just after fertilization. For retinoblastoma to develop, a mutation involving the other copy of the RB1 gene must occur in retinal cells during the person's lifetime. This second mutation usually occurs in childhood, typically leading to the development of retinoblastoma in both eyes.  In the non-germinal form of retinoblastoma, typically only one eye is affected and there is no family history of the disease. Affected individuals are born with two normal copies of the RB1 gene. Then, usually in early childhood, both copies of the RB1 gene in retinal cells acquire mutations or are lost. People with non-germinal retinoblastoma are not at risk of passing these RB1 mutations to their children. However, without genetic testing it can be difficult to tell whether a person with retinoblastoma in one eye has the germinal or the non-germinal form of the disease.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of retinoblastoma:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Retinoblastoma  - Genetic Testing Registry: Retinoblastoma  - Genomics Education Programme (UK)  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Retinoblastoma  - National Cancer Institute: Genetic Testing for Hereditary Cancer Syndromes   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care