Juvenile retinoschisis is an eye condition characterized by impaired vision that begins in childhood and occurs almost exclusively in males. The condition affects the retina, which is a specialized light-sensitive tissue that lines the back of the eye. This affects the sharpness of vision. Central vision is more commonly affected. Vision often deteriorates early in life, but then usually becomes stable until late adulthood. A second decline in vision typically occurs in a man's fifties or sixties. Sometimes severe complications occur, including separation of the retinal layers (retinal detachment) or leakage of blood vessels in the retina (vitreous hemorrhage). These can lead to blindness. Juvenile retinoschisis is caused by mutations in the RS1 gene. It is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. Low-vision aids can be helpful. Surgery may be needed for some complications.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Juvenile retinoschisis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal electroretinogram 90% Abnormality of eye movement 90% Cataract 90% Chorioretinal coloboma 90% Glaucoma 90% Chorioretinal atrophy - Cystic retinal degeneration - Progressive visual loss - Reduced amplitude of dark-adapted bright flash electroretinogram b-wave - Retinal atrophy - Retinal detachment - Retinoschisis - X-linked dominant inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Mutations in the RS1 gene cause most cases of juvenile retinoschisis. The RS1 gene provides instructions for producing a protein called retinoschisin, which is found in the retina. Studies suggest that retinoschisin plays a role in the development and maintenance of the retina, perhaps playing a role in cell adhesion (the attachment of cells together). RS1 gene mutations lead to a reduced amount or complete absence of retinoschisin, which can cause tiny splits (schisis) or tears to form in the retina. This damage often forms a "spoke-wheel" pattern in the macula, which can be seen during an eye examination. In about half of individuals, these abnormalities are seen in the area of the macula, affecting visual acuity. In the other half, the sides of the retina are affected, resulting in impaired peripheral vision. Some individuals with juvenile retinoschisis do not have a mutation in the RS1 gene. In these individuals, the cause of the disorder is unknown.
How  Juvenile retinoschisis is inherited in an x-linked recessive pattern. The gene associated with this condition is located on the X chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation must be present in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A striking characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons. In X-linked recessive inheritance, a female with one mutated copy of the gene (mutation) in each cell is called a carrier. She can pass on the mutation, but usually does not experience signs and symptoms of the condition. Carrier women have a 50% chance of passing the mutation to their children, males who inherit the mutation will be affected; females who inherit the mutation will be carriers and will nearly always have normal vision. Carrier testing for at-risk female relatives and prenatal testing for pregnancies at increased risk are possible if the disease-causing mutation in the family is known.
 There is no specific treatment for juvenile retinoschisis. Low vision services are designed to benefit those whose ability to function is compromised by impaired vision. Public school systems are mandated by federal law to provide appropriate education for children who have vision impairment. Surgery may be required to address the infrequent complications of vitreous hemorrhage and retinal detachment. Affected individuals should avoid high-contact sports and other activities that can cause head trauma to reduce risk of retinal detachment and vitreous hemorrhage.
X-linked juvenile retinoschisis is a condition characterized by impaired vision that begins in childhood and occurs almost exclusively in males. This disorder affects the retina, which is a specialized light-sensitive tissue that lines the back of the eye. Damage to the retina impairs the sharpness of vision (visual acuity) in both eyes. Typically, X-linked juvenile retinoschisis affects cells in the central area of the retina called the macula. The macula is responsible for sharp central vision, which is needed for detailed tasks such as reading, driving, and recognizing faces. X-linked juvenile retinoschisis is one type of a broader disorder called macular degeneration, which disrupts the normal functioning of the macula. Occasionally, side (peripheral) vision is affected in people with X-linked juvenile retinoschisis.  X-linked juvenile retinoschisis is usually diagnosed when affected boys start school and poor vision and difficulty with reading become apparent. In more severe cases, eye squinting and involuntary movement of the eyes (nystagmus) begin in infancy. Other early features of X-linked juvenile retinoschisis include eyes that do not look in the same direction (strabismus) and farsightedness (hyperopia). Visual acuity often declines in childhood and adolescence but then stabilizes throughout adulthood until a significant decline in visual acuity typically occurs in a man's fifties or sixties. Sometimes, severe complications develop, such as separation of the retinal layers (retinal detachment) or leakage of blood vessels in the retina (vitreous hemorrhage). These eye abnormalities can further impair vision or cause blindness.
The prevalence of X-linked juvenile retinoschisis is estimated to be 1 in 5,000 to 25,000 men worldwide.
Mutations in the RS1 gene cause most cases of X-linked juvenile retinoschisis. The RS1 gene provides instructions for making a protein called retinoschisin, which is found in the retina. Studies suggest that retinoschisin plays a role in the development and maintenance of the retina. The protein is probably involved in the organization of cells in the retina by attaching cells together (cell adhesion).  RS1 gene mutations result in a decrease in or complete loss of functional retinoschisin, which disrupts the maintenance and organization of cells in the retina. As a result, tiny splits (schisis) or tears form in the retina. This damage often forms a "spoke-wheel" pattern in the macula, which can be seen during an eye examination. In half of affected individuals, these abnormalities can occur in the area of the macula, affecting visual acuity, in the other half of cases the schisis occurs in the sides of the retina, resulting in impaired peripheral vision.  Some individuals with X-linked juvenile retinoschisis do not have a mutation in the RS1 gene. In these individuals, the cause of the disorder is unknown.
This condition is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. The gene associated with this condition is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of X-linked juvenile retinoschisis:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: X-Linked Juvenile Retinoschisis  - Genetic Testing Registry: Juvenile retinoschisis   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care