Rett syndrome is a rare genetic disease that causes developmental and nervous system problems, mostly in girls. It's related to autism spectrum disorder. Babies with Rett syndrome seem to grow and develop normally at first. Between 3 months and 3 years of age, though, they stop developing and even lose some skills. Symptoms include       - Loss of speech    - Loss of hand movements such as grasping    - Compulsive movements such as hand wringing    - Balance problems    - Breathing problems    - Behavior problems    - Learning problems or intellectual disability       Rett syndrome has no cure. You can treat some of the symptoms with medicines, surgery, and physical and speech therapy. Most people with Rett syndrome live into middle age and beyond. They will usually need care throughout their lives.    NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
Rett syndrome is a progressive, neuro-developmental condition that primarily affects girls. Affected girls appear to have normal psychomotor development during the first 6 to 18 months of life, followed by a developmental "plateau," and then rapid regression in language and motor skills. Additional signs and symptoms may include repetitive, stereotypic hand movements; fits of screaming and inconsolable crying; autistic features; panic-like attacks; teeth grinding (bruxism); episodic apnea and/or hyperpnea; gait ataxia and apraxia; tremors; seizures; and slowed head growth. Some people have an atypical form of Rett syndrome that may be more mild or more severe. Classic Rett syndrome is most commonly caused by mutations in the MECP2 gene and is usually inherited in an X-linked dominant manner. The vast majority of cases are not inherited from a parent, but are due to a new mutation in the affected person. Treatment mainly focuses on the specific signs and symptoms of the condition.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Rett syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the voice 90% Developmental regression 90% Gait disturbance 90% Neurological speech impairment 90% Stereotypic behavior 90% Abnormality of the eye 50% Cerebral cortical atrophy 50% Hypertonia 50% Incoordination 50% Kyphosis 50% Muscle weakness 50% Respiratory insufficiency 50% Scoliosis 50% Seizures 50% Sleep disturbance 50% Tremor 50% Abnormality of the autonomic nervous system 7.5% Apnea 7.5% Arrhythmia 7.5% Autism 7.5% Hemiplegia/hemiparesis 7.5% Hepatomegaly 7.5% Limitation of joint mobility 7.5% Microcephaly 7.5% Reduced bone mineral density 7.5% Self-injurious behavior 7.5% Skeletal muscle atrophy 7.5% Abnormality of the teeth - Autistic behavior - Bruxism - Cachexia - Constipation - Dystonia - EEG abnormality - EKG: T-wave abnormalities - Gait apraxia - Gait ataxia - Gastroesophageal reflux - Intellectual disability, profound - Intermittent hyperventilation - Motor deterioration - Postnatal microcephaly - Prolonged QTc interval - Short foot - Short stature - Spasticity - Truncal ataxia - X-linked dominant inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Rett syndrome is typically caused by changes (mutations) in the MECP2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein (MeCP2) needed for the development of the nervous system and normal brain function. Mutations in the MECP2 gene that cause Rett syndrome can change the MeCP2 protein or result in the production of too little protein, which appears to disrupt the normal function of neurons and other cells in the brain. Several conditions caused by changes in other genes (such as FOXG1 syndrome) have overlapping signs and/or symptoms of Rett syndrome. These conditions were once thought to be variant forms of Rett syndrome, but are now usually considered to be separate disorders.
 Although Rett syndrome is a genetic disorder, less than 1 percent of recorded cases are inherited or passed from one generation to the next. Most cases are sporadic, which means the mutation occurs randomly, and are not inherited. A few families have been described with more than one affected family member. These cases helped researchers determine that Rett syndrome has an X-linked dominant pattern of inheritance. A condition is considered X-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes. The inheritance is dominant if one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition.
There is no cure for Rett syndrome. Treatment for the disorder is symptomatic, focusing on the management of symptoms, and supportive. Medication may be needed for breathing irregularities and motor difficulties, and antiepileptic drugs may be used to control seizures. Occupational therapy, physiotherapy, and hydrotherapy may prolong mobility. Some children may require special equipment and aids such as braces to arrest scoliosis, splints to modify hand movements, and nutritional programs to help them maintain adequate weight. Special academic, social, vocational, and support services may be required in some cases.
The course of Rett syndrome, including the age of onset and the severity of symptoms, varies from child to child. Despite the difficulties with symptoms, most individuals with Rett syndrome continue to live well into middle age and beyond. Because the disorder is rare, very little is known about long-term prognosis and life expectancy.
The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) and other institutes of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) conduct research related to Rett syndrome in laboratories at the NIH, and also support additional Rett syndrome research through grants to major medical institutions across the country. The discovery of the Rett syndrome gene in 1999 provides a basis for further genetic studies. Understanding the cause of this disorder is necessary for developing new therapies to manage specific symptoms, as well as for providing better methods of diagnosis.
This condition affects an estimated 1 in 8,500 females.
Classic Rett syndrome and some variant forms of the condition are caused by mutations in the MECP2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein (MeCP2) that is critical for normal brain function. Although the exact function of the MeCP2 protein is unclear, it is likely involved in maintaining connections (synapses) between nerve cells (neurons). It may also be necessary for the normal function of other types of brain cells.  The MeCP2 protein is thought to help regulate the activity of genes in the brain. This protein may also control the production of different versions of certain proteins in brain cells. Mutations in the MECP2 gene alter the MeCP2 protein or result in the production of less protein, which appears to disrupt the normal function of neurons and other cells in the brain. Specifically, studies suggest that changes in the MeCP2 protein may reduce the activity of certain neurons and impair their ability to communicate with one another. It is unclear how these changes lead to the specific features of Rett syndrome.  Several conditions with signs and symptoms overlapping those of Rett syndrome have been found to result from mutations in other genes. These conditions, including FOXG1 syndrome, were previously thought to be variant forms of Rett syndrome. However, doctors and researchers have identified some important differences between the conditions, so they are now usually considered to be separate disorders.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Rett syndrome:  - Boston Children's Hospital  - Cleveland Clinic  - Gene Review: Gene Review: MECP2-Related Disorders  - Genetic Testing Registry: Rett syndrome  - International Rett Syndrome Foundation: Living with Rett Syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Rett Syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care