There are four major blood types: A, B, O, and AB. The types are based on substances on the surface of the blood cells. Another blood type is called Rh. Rh factor is a protein on red blood cells. Most people are Rh-positive; they have Rh factor. Rh-negative people don't have it. Rh factor is inherited though genes.    When you're pregnant, blood from your baby can cross into your bloodstream, especially during delivery. If you're Rh-negative and your baby is Rh-positive, your body will react to the baby's blood as a foreign substance. It will create antibodies (proteins) against the baby's blood. These antibodies usually don't cause problems during a first pregnancy.    But Rh incompatibility may cause problems in later pregnancies, if the baby is Rh-positive. This is because the antibodies stay in your body once they have formed. The antibodies can cross the placenta and attack the baby's red blood cells. The baby could get Rh disease, a serious condition that can cause a serious type of anemia.    Blood tests can tell whether you have Rh factor and whether your body has made antibodies. Injections of a medicine called Rh immune globulin can keep your body from making Rh antibodies. It helps prevent the problems of Rh incompatibility. If treatment is needed for the baby, it can include supplements to help the body to make red blood cells and blood transfusions.    NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
The Rh deficiency syndrome, also known as Rh-null syndrome, is a blood disorder where people have red blood cells (RBCs) lacking all Rh antigens. The Rh antigens maintain the integrity of the RBC membrane and therefore, RBCs which lack Rh antigens have an abnormal shape. There are two types of Rh deficiency syndrome: The regulator type is associated with many different changes (mutations) in the RHAG gene .  The amorph type is caused by inactive copies of a gene (silent alleles) at the RH locus. As a result, the RBCs do not express any of the Rh antigens. The absence of the Rh complex alters the RBC shape, increases its tendency to break down (osmotic fragility), and shortens its lifespan, resulting in a hemolytic anemia that is usually mild. These patients are at risk of having adverse transfusion reactions because they may produce antibodies against several of the Rh antigens and can only receive blood from people who have the same condition. Rh deficiency syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Management is individualized according to the severity of hemolytic anemia.
A difference in blood type between a pregnant woman and her baby causes Rh incompatibility. The condition occurs if a woman is Rh-negative and her baby is Rh-positive.
                
When you're pregnant, blood from your baby can cross into your bloodstream, especially during delivery. If you're Rh-negative and your baby is Rh-positive, your body will react to the baby's blood as a foreign substance.
                
Your body will create antibodies (proteins) against the baby's Rh-positive blood. These antibodies can cross the placenta and attack the baby's red blood cells. This can lead to hemolytic anemia in the baby.
                
Rh incompatibility usually doesn't cause problems during a first pregnancy. The baby often is born before many of the antibodies develop.
                
However, once you've formed Rh antibodies, they remain in your body. Thus, the condition is more likely to cause problems in second or later pregnancies (if the baby is Rh-positive).
                
With each pregnancy, your body continues to make Rh antibodies. As a result, each Rh-positive baby you conceive becomes more at risk for serious problems, such as severe hemolytic anemia.
An Rh-negative woman who conceives a child with an Rh-positive man is at risk for Rhincompatibility.
                
Rh factor is inherited (passed from parents to children through the genes). If you're Rh-negative and the father of your baby is Rh-positive, the baby has a 50 percent or more chance of having Rh-positive blood.
                
Simple blood tests can show whether you and the father of your baby are Rh-positive or Rh-negative.
                
If you're Rh-negative, your risk of problems from Rh incompatibility is higher if you were exposed to Rh-positive blood before the pregnancy. This may have happened during:
                
An earlier pregnancy (usually during delivery). You also may have been exposed to Rh-positive blood if you had bleeding or abdominal trauma (for example, from a car accident) during the pregnancy.
                
An ectopic pregnancy, a miscarriage, or an induced abortion. (An ectopic pregnancy is a pregnancy that starts outside of the uterus, or womb.)
                
A mismatched blood transfusion or blood and marrow stem cell transplant.
                
An injection or puncture with a needle or other object containing Rh-positive blood.
                
Certain tests also can expose you to Rh-positive blood. Examples include amniocentesis (AM-ne-o-sen-TE-sis) and chorionic villus (ko-re-ON-ik VIL-us) sampling (CVS).
                
Amniocentesis is a test that you may have during pregnancy. Your doctor uses a needle to remove a small amount of fluid from the sac around your baby. The fluid is then tested for various reasons.
                
CVS also may be done during pregnancy. For this test, your doctor threads a thin tube through the vagina and cervix to the placenta. He or she removes a tissue sample from the placenta using gentle suction. The tissue sample is tested for various reasons.
                
Unless you were treated with the medicine that prevents Rh antibodies (Rh immune globulin) after each of these events, you're at risk for Rh incompatibility during current and future pregnancies.
Rh incompatibility doesn't cause signs or symptoms in a pregnant woman. In a baby, the condition can lead to hemolytic anemia. Hemolytic anemia is a condition in which red blood cells are destroyed faster than the body can replace them.
                
Red blood cells contain hemoglobin (HEE-muh-glow-bin), an iron-rich protein that carries oxygen to the body. Without enough red blood cells and hemoglobin, the baby won't get enough oxygen.
                
Hemolytic anemia can cause mild to severe signs and symptoms in a newborn, such as jaundice and a buildup of fluid.
                
Jaundice is a yellowish color of the skin and whites of the eyes. When red blood cells die, they release hemoglobin into the blood. The hemoglobin is broken down into a compound called bilirubin. This compound gives the skin and eyes a yellowish color. High levels of bilirubin can lead to brain damage in the baby.
                
The buildup of fluid is a result of heart failure. Without enough hemoglobin-carrying red blood cells, the baby's heart has to work harder to move oxygen-rich blood through the body. This stress can lead to heart failure.
                
Heart failure can cause fluid to build up in many parts of the body. When this occurs in a fetus or newborn, the condition is called hydrops fetalis (HI-drops fe-TAL-is).
                
Severe hemolytic anemia can be fatal to a newborn at the time of birth or shortly after.
Rh incompatibility can be prevented with Rh immune globulin, as long as the medicine is given at the correct times. Once you have formed Rh antibodies, the medicine will no longer help.
                
Thus, a woman who has Rh-negative blood must be treated with Rh immune globulin during and after each pregnancy or after any other event that allows her blood to mix with Rh-positive blood.
                
Early prenatal care also can help prevent some of the problems linked to Rh incompatibility. For example, your doctor can find out early whether you're at risk for the condition.
                
If you're at risk, your doctor can closely monitor your pregnancy. He or she will watch for signs of hemolytic anemia in your baby and provided treatment as needed.