Rickets causes soft, weak bones in children. It usually occurs when they do not get enough vitamin D, which helps growing bones absorb the minerals calcium and phosphorous. It can also happen when calcium or phosphorus levels are too low.    Your child might not get enough vitamin D if he or she       - Has dark skin    - Spends too little time outside    - Has on sunscreen all the time when out of doors    - Doesn't eat foods containing vitamin D because of lactose intolerance or a strict vegetarian diet    - Is breastfed without receiving vitamin D supplements    - Can't make or use vitamin D because of a medical disorder such as celiac disease       In addition to dietary rickets, children can get an inherited form of the disease. Symptoms include bone pain or tenderness, impaired growth, and deformities of the bones and teeth. Your child's doctor uses lab and imaging tests to make the diagnosis. Treatment is replacing the calcium, phosphorus, or vitamin D that are lacking in the diet. Rickets is rare in the United States.
 The signs and symptoms of rickets include: Bone pain or tenderness Bowed (curved) legs Large forehead Stunted growth Abnormally curved spine Large abdomen Abnormally shaped ribs and breastbone Wide wrist and elbow joints Teeth abnormalities
 Rickets is caused by a lack of vitamin D. A child might not get enough vitamin D if he or she: Has dark skin Spends too little time outside Has on sunscreen all the time when out of doors Doesn't eat foods containing vitamin D because of lactose intolerance or a strict vegetarian diet Is breastfed without receiving vitamin D supplements Can't make or use vitamin D because of a medical disorder such as celiac disease Has an inherited disorder that affects vitamin D levels
 Rickets is typically diagnosed using specific blood tests and x-rays. Blood tests usually show low levels of calcium and phosphorus and high levels of alkaline phosphatase. Bone x-rays may show areas with calcium loss or changes in bone shape. Bone biopsies are rarely performed, but can confirm the diagnosis of rickets.
 The treatment for rickets depends on the cause of the condition. If rickets is caused by a lack of vitamin D in the diet, then it is usually treated with carefully adjusted levels of vitamin D and calcium. The child's condition may improve within a few weeks of treatment. If rickets is caused by an inherited disorder or another medical condition, a healthcare provider would determine the appropriate treatment.
Hypophosphatemic rickets (previously called vitamin D-resistant rickets) is a disorder in which the bones become painfully soft and bend easily, due to low levels of phosphate in the blood. Symptoms usually begin in early childhood and can range in severity. Severe forms may cause bowing of the legs and other bone deformities; bone pain; joint pain; poor bone growth; and short stature. In some affected babies, the space between the skull bones closes too soon (craniosynostosis). This sometimes results in developmental abnormalities. Hypophosphatemic rickets is almost always inherited and may be caused by changes (mutations) in any of several genes. Most commonly it is due to the PHEX gene and inherited in an X-linked dominant manner. Less commonly it is inherited in an X-linked recessive manner (often called Dent disease); autosomal dominant manner; or autosomal recessive manner. Treatment involves taking phosphate and calcitriol in order to raise phosphate levels in the blood and promote normal bone formation.
 Hypophosphatemic rickets is almost always hereditary and may be caused by mutations in any of several genes. The specific gene involved determines the way it is inherited. Most commonly, it is caused by a mutation in the PHEX gene. Other genes that can be responsible for the condition include the CLCN5, DMP1, ENPP1, FGF23, and SLC34A3 genes. The genes associated with hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets are involved in keeping a proper balance of phosphate in the body. Many of these genes directly or indirectly regulate a protein that normally inhibits the kidneys' ability to reabsorb phosphate into the blood. Mutations affecting the function of these genes increase the production (or reduce the breakdown) of the protein, causing the protein to be overactive. The overactivity of the protein reduces phosphate reabsorption by the kidneys, leading to the features of the condition. Rarer, sporadic, acquired cases are sometimes associated with benign (non-cancerous) mesenchymal tumors that decrease resorption of phosphate.
How  Hypophosphatemic rickets is most often inherited in an X-linked dominant manner. This means that the gene responsible for the condition is located on the X chromosome, and having only one mutated copy of the gene is enough to cause the condition. Because males have only one X chromosome (and one Y chromosome) and females have two X chromosomes, X-linked dominant conditions affect males and females differently. Both males and females can have an X-linked dominant condition. However, because males don't have a second, working copy of the gene (as females do), they usually have more severe disease than females. If a father has the mutated X-linked gene: all of his daughters will inherit the mutated gene (they will all receive his X chromosome) none of his sons will inherit the mutated gene (they only inherit his Y chromosome) If a mother has the mutated X-linked gene, each of her children (both male and female) has a 50% chance to inherit the mutated gene. Less commonly, hypophosphatemic rickets is inherited in an X-linked recessive, autosomal dominant, or autosomal recessive manner.
Hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets is a disorder related to low levels of phosphate in the blood (hypophosphatemia). Phosphate is a mineral that is essential for the normal formation of bones and teeth.  In most cases, the signs and symptoms of hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets begin in early childhood. The features of the disorder vary widely, even among affected members of the same family. Mildly affected individuals may have hypophosphatemia without other signs and symptoms. More severely affected children experience slow growth and are shorter than their peers. They develop bone abnormalities that can interfere with movement and cause bone pain. The most noticeable of these abnormalities are bowed legs or knock knees (a condition in which the lower legs are positioned at an outward angle). These abnormalities become apparent with weight-bearing activities such as walking. If untreated, they tend to worsen with time.  Other signs and symptoms of hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets can include premature fusion of the skull bones (craniosynostosis) and dental abnormalities. The disorder may also cause abnormal bone growth where ligaments and tendons attach to joints (enthesopathy). In adults, hypophosphatemia is characterized by a softening of the bones known as osteomalacia.  Researchers have described several forms of hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets, which are distinguished by their pattern of inheritance and genetic cause. The most common form of the disorder is known as X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets (XLH). It has an X-linked dominant pattern of inheritance. X-linked recessive, autosomal dominant, and autosomal recessive forms of the disorder are much rarer. The different inheritance patterns are described below.  Another rare type of the disorder is known as hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria (HHRH). In addition to hypophosphatemia, this condition is characterized by the excretion of high levels of calcium in the urine (hypercalciuria).
X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets is the most common form of rickets that runs in families. It affects about 1 in 20,000 newborns. Each of the other forms of hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets has been identified in only a few families.
Hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets can result from mutations in several genes. Mutations in the PHEX gene, which are responsible for X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets, occur most frequently. Mutations in other genes cause the less common forms of the condition.  Hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets is characterized by a phosphate imbalance in the body. Among its many functions, phosphate plays a critical role in the formation and growth of bones in childhood and helps maintain bone strength in adults. Phosphate levels are controlled in large part by the kidneys. The kidneys normally excrete excess phosphate in urine, and they reabsorb this mineral into the bloodstream when more is needed. However, in people with hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets, the kidneys cannot reabsorb phosphate effectively and too much of this mineral is excreted from the body in urine. As a result, not enough phosphate is available in the bloodstream to participate in normal bone development and maintenance.  The genes associated with hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets are involved in maintaining the proper balance of phosphate. Many of these genes, including the PHEX gene, directly or indirectly regulate a protein called fibroblast growth factor 23 (produced from the FGF23 gene). This protein normally inhibits the kidneys' ability to reabsorb phosphate into the bloodstream. Gene mutations increase the production or reduce the breakdown of fibroblast growth factor 23. The resulting overactivity of this protein reduces phosphate reabsorption by the kidneys, leading to hypophosphatemia and the related features of hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets.
Hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets can have several patterns of inheritance. When the condition results from mutations in the PHEX gene, it is inherited in an X-linked dominant pattern. The PHEX gene is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation in one of the two copies of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In males (who have only one X chromosome), a mutation in the only copy of the gene in each cell causes the disorder. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.  Less commonly, hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets can have an X-linked recessive pattern of inheritance. This form of the condition is often called Dent disease. Like the PHEX gene, the gene associated with Dent disease is located on the X chromosome. In males, one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females, a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females.  In a few families, hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets has had an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern, which means one copy of an altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. The rare condition HHRH has an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance, which means both copies of a gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. However, some parents of children with HHRH have experienced hypercalcuria and kidney stones.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: X-Linked Hypophosphatemia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets  - Genetic Testing Registry: Autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic bone disease  - Genetic Testing Registry: Autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic vitamin D refractory rickets  - Genetic Testing Registry: Familial X-linked hypophosphatemic vitamin D refractory rickets  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hypophosphatemic rickets, autosomal recessive, 2   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care