 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Robinow Sorauf syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Broad hallux - Duplication of phalanx of hallux - Hypertelorism - Long nose - Malar flattening - Narrow nose - Plagiocephaly - Shallow orbits - Strabismus - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Robinow syndrome is a rare disorder that affects the bones as well as other parts of the body. Two forms of Robinow syndrome have been described: autosomal recessive Robinow syndrome, and the milder autosomal dominant Robinow syndrome. They are distinguished based on their modes of inheritance, symptoms, and severity. Autosomal recessive Robinow syndrome causes shortening of the long bones in the arms and legs; short fingers and toes; wedge-shaped spinal bones leading to kyphoscoliosis; fused or missing ribs; short stature; and distinctive facial features. Other features may include underdeveloped genitalia; dental problems; kidney or heart defects; or delayed development. This form is caused by mutations in the ROR2 gene. Autosomal dominant Robinow syndrome causes more mild, but similar, features. There are rarely spine and rib abnormalities, and short stature is less severe. A variant type of this form is additionally characterized by osteosclerosis. Autosomal dominant Robinow syndrome may be caused by a mutation in the WNT5A or DVL1 gene. In some cases, the underlying cause of Robinow syndrome is unknown. Management may include bracing or surgery for skeletal abnormalities and growth hormone to increase growth rate in affected children.
How  Robinow syndrome may be inherited in an autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant manner. Autosomal recessive (AR) inheritance means both copies of the responsible gene in each cell must have a mutation for a person to be affected. The parents of a person with AR Robinow syndrome usually each carry one mutated copy of the gene and are referred to as carriers. Carriers typically are unaffected. When two carriers of AR Robinow syndrome have children together, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) chance to be affected, a 50% (1 in 2) chance to be an unaffected carrier like each parent, and a 25% chance to be unaffected and not a carrier. Autosomal dominant (AD) inheritance means that having only one mutated copy of the responsible gene in each cell is enough to cause features of the condition. Some people with AD Robinow syndrome inherit the mutated gene from an affected parent. In other cases, the mutation that causes the condition occurs for the first time in the affected person. When a person with AD Robinow syndrome has children, each child has a 50% chance to inherit the mutated gene.
 Genetic testing for autosomal recessive Robinow syndrome and autosomal dominant Robinow syndrome is available. However, not all people diagnosed with either type of Robinow syndrome have mutations in the genes known to cause these conditions. In these cases, the cause remains unknown. Carrier testing for autosomal recessive Robinow syndrome is possible if the disease-causing mutations have been identified in an affected family member. The Genetic Testing Registry (GTR) provides information about the genetic tests for Robinow syndrome. The intended audience for the GTR is health care providers and researchers. Patients and consumers with specific questions about a genetic test should contact a health care provider or a genetics professional.
Both the autosomal recessive and autosomal dominant forms of Robinow syndrome are rare.  Fewer than 200 people with autosomal recessive Robinow syndrome have been described in the medical literature. This form of the condition has been identified in families from several countries, including Turkey, Oman, Pakistan, and Brazil.  Autosomal dominant Robinow syndrome has been diagnosed in fewer than 50 families; about 10 of these families have had the osteosclerotic form.
Autosomal recessive Robinow syndrome results from mutations in the ROR2 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein whose function is not well understood, although it is involved in chemical signaling pathways that are essential for normal development before birth. In particular, the ROR2 protein appears to play a critical role in the formation of the skeleton, heart, and genitals. Mutations in the ROR2 gene prevent cells from making any functional ROR2 protein, which disrupts development starting before birth and leads to the characteristic features of Robinow syndrome.  Autosomal dominant Robinow syndrome can be caused by mutations in the WNT5A or DVL1 gene, with the osteosclerotic form of the condition resulting from DVL1 gene mutations. The proteins produced from these genes appear to be part of the same chemical signaling pathways as the ROR2 protein. Mutations in either of these genes alter the production or function of their respective proteins, which impairs chemical signaling that is important for early development.  Some people with the characteristic signs and symptoms of Robinow syndrome do not have an identified mutation in the ROR2, WNT5A, or DVL1 gene. In these cases, the cause of the condition is unknown.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Robinow syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Autosomal Dominant Robinow Syndrome  - Gene Review: Gene Review: ROR2-Related Robinow Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Robinow syndrome  - University of Chicago: Genetic Testing for Robinow Syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care