Russell-Silver syndrome (RSS) is a congenital disorder that causes poor growth; low birth weight; short height; and size differences (asymmetry) of parts of the body. Other signs and symptoms may include poor appetite; low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) due to feeding difficulties; a small, triangular face with distinctive facial features; clinodactyly (curved finger); digestive system abnormalities; delayed development; and/or learning disabilities. The genetic causes of RSS are complex and relate to certain genes that control growth. Most cases are not inherited from a parent and occur sporadically. In rare cases, it may be inherited in an autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive manner.
 Russell-Silver syndrome (RSS) is a genetic disorder that usually results from the abnormal regulation of certain genes that control growth. Two genetic causes have been found to result in the majority of cases: abnormalities at an imprinted region on chromosome 11p15 - for some genes, only the copy inherited from a person's father (paternal copy) or mother (maternal copy) is "turned on," or expressed. These parent-specific differences in gene expression are caused by a phenomenon called genomic imprinting. Abnormalities involving genes that undergo imprinting are responsible for many cases of RSS. maternal disomy of chromosome 7 (written as matUPD7) - this occurs when a child inherits both copies of chromosome 7 from the mother, instead of one copy from the mother and one copy from the father. Other chromosome abnormalities involving any of several chromosomes have also been described as causing RSS, or RSS-like syndromes. In some people with RSS, the underlying cause remains unknown.
 Most cases of Russell-Silver syndrome (RSS) are sporadic (not inherited), which means they occur in people with no family history of RSS. Less commonly, Russell-Silver syndrome is inherited. In some families, it appears to be inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that having one "copy" of a genetic change in each cell is enough to cause the disorder. In some cases, an affected person inherits the genetic change from a parent. In other cases, the change occurs for the first time in an affected person. When a person with a genetic change that causes an autosomal dominant condition has children, each child has a 50% (1 in 2) chance to inherit the genetic change. In other families, the condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that to be affected, a person must have a change in both copies of the responsible gene in each cell. Affected people inherit one copy from each parent, who is referred to as a carrier. Carriers of an autosomal recessive condition typically do not have any signs or symptoms (they are unaffected). When 2 carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a: 25% (1 in 4) chance to be affected 50% (1 in 2) chance to be an unaffected carrier like each parent 25% chance to be unaffected and not be a carrier
The exact incidence of Russell-Silver syndrome is unknown, but the condition is estimated to affect 1 in 75,000 to 100,000 people.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Russell-Silver syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Russell-Silver Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Russell-Silver syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Russell-Silver syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care