Summary : As parents, we want to keep our children safe from harm. Take steps to keep your children safe:       - Install the right child safety seat in your car    - Teach children how to cross the street safely    - Make sure they wear the right gear and equipment for sports    - Install and test smoke alarms     - Store medicines, cleaners and other dangerous substances in locked cabinets    - Babyproof your home    - Don't leave small children unattended
Summary : You can't remove all the safety hazards from your life, but you can reduce them. To avoid many major hazards and prepare for emergencies       -  Keep emergency phone numbers by your telephones    -  Make a first aid kit for your home    -  Make a family emergency plan    -  Install and maintain smoke alarms and carbon monoxide detectors    -  Keep guns unloaded and locked up. Lock up the ammunition separately.     -  Follow the directions carefully when using tools or equipment       Young children are especially at risk. Supervision is the best way to keep them safe. Childproofing the house can also help.
Summary : Many U.S. households have guns, but they can cause harm if not handled properly. Here are some things you can do to keep yourself and your family safe:       - Teach children that they shouldn't touch guns and that if they see a gun, to leave it alone and tell an adult.     - If your children play at another home, talk to the parents about gun safety.     - Treat every gun as if it were loaded.     - Always store guns unloaded.     - Lock guns in a rack or safe, and hide the keys or combination.     - Store ammunition away from guns and keep it locked.     - Don't keep guns in your home if someone in your family has a mental illness, severe depression, or potential for violence.
Summary : Preventing fires is an important part of fire safety. In the United States, cooking is the main cause of home fires. Cigarettes are a big risk too - they are the leading cause of fire deaths. Here are some fire prevention tips:       - Don't leave the stove or oven unattended when they are on    - Don't let children use kitchen appliances unsupervised    - Don't smoke in bed    - Make sure your electrical appliances and cords are in good condition       It is also important to be prepared in case there is a fire. Make sure that you have working smoke detectors on every floor and in every bedroom. You should also have fire extinguishers on every floor and in your kitchen. Make and practice an escape plan in case the main exit is blocked.
Summary : Playing sports can be fun, but it can also be dangerous if you are not careful. You can help prevent injuries by       - Getting a physical to make sure you are healthy before you start playing your sport    - Wearing the right shoes, gear, and equipment     - Drinking lots of water     - Warming up and stretching       If you have already hurt yourself playing a sport, make sure you recover completely before you start up again. If possible, protect the injured part of your body with padding, a brace, or special equipment. When you do start playing again, start slowly.
Summary : In the U.S., the government's Food and Drug Administration (FDA) must approve any drug before it can be sold. This is true whether it's a prescription or an over-the-counter drug. The FDA evaluates the safety of a drug by looking at       - Side effects    - How it's manufactured    - Results of animal testing and clinical trials       The FDA also monitors a drug's safety after approval.    For you, drug safety means buying online from only legitimate pharmacies and taking your medicines correctly.
Summary : For most kids and teens, technology is an important part of their lives. They browse the Web for information, use social networking sites, text, and chat. But there can also be dangers, and it is important for parents to monitor their children's use and teach them how to be safe online:       - Never give out personal information, such as your full name, address, phone number, or school name    - Tell an adult if any communication (chat, text, e-mail message) makes you feel threatened or uncomfortable    - Never send sexually explicit photographs or messages    - On social networking sites, use privacy controls and only friend people that you know       Of course, some of this advice is good for adults, too.
Summary : Safe steps in food handling, cooking, and storage can prevent foodborne illness. There are four basic steps to food safety at home:       - Clean - always wash your fruits and vegetables, hands, counters, and cooking utensils.    - Separate - keep raw foods to themselves. Germs can spread from one food to another.    - Cook - foods need to get hot and stay hot. Heat kills germs.    - Chill - put fresh food in the refrigerator right away.       In the grocery store, avoid cans that are bulging or jars that have cracks or loose lids. Check packages to be sure food hasn't reached its expiration date.    United States Department of Agriculture