Key Points
                    - Ewing sarcoma is a type of tumor that forms in bone or soft tissue.    - Signs and symptoms of Ewing sarcoma include swelling and pain near the tumor.     - Tests that examine the bone and soft tissue are used to diagnose and stage Ewing sarcoma.    - A biopsy is done to diagnose Ewing sarcoma.     - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery).
                
                
                    Ewing sarcoma is a type of tumor that forms in bone or soft tissue.
                    Ewing sarcoma is a type of tumor that forms from a certain kind of cell in bone or soft tissue. Ewing sarcoma may be found in the bones of the legs, arms, feet, hands, chest, pelvis, spine, or skull. Ewing sarcoma also may be found in the soft tissue of the trunk, arms, legs, head and neck, abdominal cavity, or other areas.   Ewing sarcoma is most common in adolescents and young adults.   Ewing sarcoma has also been called peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor, Askin tumor (Ewing sarcoma of the chest wall), extraosseous Ewing sarcoma (Ewing sarcoma in tissue other than bone), and Ewing sarcoma family of tumors.
Signs and symptoms of Ewing sarcoma include swelling and pain near the tumor. These and other signs and symptoms may be caused by Ewing sarcoma or by other conditions. Check with your childs doctor if your child has any of the following:          - Pain and/or swelling, usually in the arms, legs, chest, back, or pelvis.    - A lump (which may feel soft and warm) in the arms, legs, chest, or pelvis.    -  Fever for no known reason.    - A bone that breaks for no known reason.
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery). The factors that affect prognosis (chance of recovery) are different before and after treatment.    Before treatment, prognosis depends on:         - Whether the tumor has spread to lymph nodes or distant parts of the body.     - Where in the body the tumor started.    - Whether the tumor formed in the bone or in soft tissue.    - How large the tumor is at when the tumor is diagnosed.    - Whether the LDH level in the blood is higher than normal.    - Whether the tumor has certain gene changes.     - Whether the child is younger than 15 years.     - The patient's gender.     - Whether the child has had treatment for a different cancer before Ewing sarcoma.    - Whether the tumor has just been diagnosed or has recurred (come back).        After treatment, prognosis is affected by:         - Whether the tumor was completely removed by surgery.    - Whether the tumor responds to chemotherapy or radiation therapy.        If the cancer recurs after initial treatment, prognosis depends on:         - Whether the cancer came back more than two years after the initial treatment.    - Where in the body the tumor came back.    - The type of initial treatment given.
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials.
                    This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website.     Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy     CAR T-cell therapy is a type of immunotherapy that changes the patient's T cells (a type of immune system cell) so they will attack certain proteins on the surface of cancer cells. T cells are taken from the patient and special receptors are added to their surface in the laboratory. The changed cells are called chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells. The CAR T cells are grown in the laboratory and given to the patient by infusion. The CAR T cells multiply in the patient's blood and attack cancer cells. CAR T-cell therapy is being studied in the treatment of Ewing sarcoma that has recurred.
                
                
                    Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial.
                    For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment.   Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment.   Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward.
                
                
                    Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment.
                    Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment.   Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.
Ewing sarcoma is a malignant (cancerous) bone tumor that affects children. It can occur any time during childhood and young adulthood, but usually develops during puberty, when bones are growing rapidly. The tumor may arise anywhere in the body, usually in the long bones of the arms and legs, the pelvis, or the chest. It may also develop in the skull or the flat bones of the trunk. There are few symptoms. The most common is pain and occasionally swelling at the site of the tumor. Fever may also be present. The tumor often spreads (metastasis) to the lungs and other bones. The cause of Ewing sarcoma is unknown. Most cases are thought to occur randomly and many involved a reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 11 and 22. Treatment depends upon a number of factors, but may include chemotherapy, radiation and/or surgical interventions.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Ewing sarcoma. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Ewing's sarcoma - Somatic mutation - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The exact cause of Ewing sarcoma remains largely unknown. Chromosomal studies have found that Ewing sarcoma cells are often characterized by an abnormal change in their genetic makeup known as a reciprocal translocation. The most common mutation, occurring in approximately 85% of Ewing sarcoma tumors, involves two genes, the EWSR1 gene on chromosome 22 and the FLI1 gene on chromosome 11. This rearrangement of genetic material between chromosomes 22 and 11 fuses part of the EWSR1 gene with part of the FLI1 gene, creating the EWSR1/FLI1 fusion gene. This mutation is acquired during a person's lifetime and is present only in tumor cells. This type of genetic change, called a somatic mutation, is not inherited. In extremely rare cases, Ewing sarcoma may develop as a second malignancy, which means that the condition develops as a late-onset complication of earlier treatment for another form of cancer.
 This condition is generally not inherited but arises from a mutation in the body's cells that occurs after conception (somatic mutation). Most cases are considered to be sporadic. However, the incidence of neuroectodermal and stomach malignancies is increased among family members of patients with tumors of the Ewing sarcoma family.  A search of the medical literature did identify a very small number of cases of Ewing sarcoma among siblings. To access articles on this topic, click here.
Approximately 3 per 1 million children each year are diagnosed with a Ewing sarcoma. It is estimated that, in the United States, 250 children are diagnosed with one of these types of tumor each year. Ewing sarcoma accounts for about 1.5 percent of all childhood cancers, and it is the second most common type of bone tumor in children (the most common type of bone cancer is called osteosarcoma).
The most common mutation that causes Ewing sarcoma involves two genes, the EWSR1 gene on chromosome 22 and the FLI1 gene on chromosome 11. A rearrangement (translocation) of genetic material between chromosomes 22 and 11, written as t(11;22), fuses part of the EWSR1 gene with part of the FLI1 gene, creating the EWSR1/FLI1 fusion gene. This mutation is acquired during a person's lifetime and is present only in tumor cells. This type of genetic change, called a somatic mutation, is not inherited.  The protein produced from the EWSR1/FLI1 fusion gene, called EWS/FLI, has functions of the protein products of both genes. The FLI protein, produced from the FLI1 gene, attaches (binds) to DNA and regulates an activity called transcription, which is the first step in the production of proteins from genes. The FLI protein controls the growth and development of some cell types by regulating the transcription of certain genes. The EWS protein, produced from the EWSR1 gene, also regulates transcription. The EWS/FLI protein has the DNA-binding function of the FLI protein as well as the transcription regulation function of the EWS protein. It is thought that the EWS/FLI protein turns the transcription of a variety of genes on and off abnormally. This dysregulation of transcription leads to uncontrolled growth and division (proliferation) and abnormal maturation and survival of cells, causing tumor development.  The EWSR1/FLI1 fusion gene occurs in approximately 85 percent of Ewing sarcomas. Translocations that fuse the EWSR1 gene with other genes that are related to the FLI1 gene can also cause these types of tumors, although these alternative translocations are relatively uncommon. The fusion proteins produced from the less common gene translocations have the same function as the EWS/FLI protein.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Ewing sarcoma:  - Cancer.Net: Ewing Family of Tumors - Childhood: Diagnosis  - Cancer.Net: Ewing Family of Tumors - Childhood: Treatment  - Genetic Testing Registry: Ewing's sarcoma  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Ewing Sarcoma   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care