Sarcoidosis is a disease that leads to inflammation, usually in your lungs, skin, or lymph nodes. It starts as tiny, grain-like lumps, called granulomas. Sarcoidosis can affect any organ in your body.     No one is sure what causes sarcoidosis. It affects men and women of all ages and races. It occurs mostly in people ages 20 to 50, African Americans, especially women, and people of Northern European origin.    Many people have no symptoms. If you have symptoms, they may include       - Cough    - Shortness of breath    - Weight loss    - Night sweats    - Fatigue       Tests to diagnose sarcoidosis include chest x-rays, lung function tests, and a biopsy. Not everyone who has the disease needs treatment. If you do, prednisone, a type of steroid, is the main treatment.    NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
 No one yet knows what causes sarcoidosis. It is thought by most scientists to be a disorder of the immune system, where the body's natural defense system malfunctions. Some physicians believe that sarcoidosis may result from a respiratory infection caused by a virus. Others suspect that exposure to toxins or allergens in the environment is to blame. It's also possible that some people have a genetic predisposition to developing sarcoidosis, which, when combined with an environmental trigger, produces the disease. Studies are ongoing to investigate the genetic and environmental components of this disease.
 The treatment of sarcoidosis depends on :  the symptoms present the severity of the symptoms whether any vital organs (e.g., your lungs, eyes, heart, or brain) are affected how the organ is affected. Some organs must be treated, regardless of your symptoms. Others may not need to be treated. Usually, if a patient doesn't have symptoms, he or she doesn't need treatment, and probably will recover in time. Currently, the drug that is most commonly used to treat sarcoidosis is prednisone.  When a patient's condition gets worse when taking prednisone or when the side effects of prednisone are severe in the patient, a doctor may prescribe other drugs. Most of these other drugs reduce inflammation by suppressing the immune system. These other drugs include: hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil), methotrexate, azathioprine (Imuran), and cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan). Researchers continue to look for new and better treatments for sarcoidosis. Anti-tumor necrosis factor drugs and antibiotics are currently being studied. More detailed information about the treatment of sarcoidosis can be found at the following links: https://www.stopsarcoidosis.org/awareness/treatment-options/ http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/301914-treatment#showall
Sarcoidosis affects people of all ages and races. However, it's more common among African Americans and Northern Europeans. In the United States, the disease affects African Americans somewhat more often and more severely than Whites.
                
Studies have shown that sarcoidosis tends to vary amongst ethnic groups. For example, eye problems related to the disease are more common in Japanese people.
                
Lofgren's syndrome, a type of sarcoidosis, is more common in people of European descent. Lofgren's syndrome may involve fever, enlarged lymph nodes, arthritis (usually in the ankles), and/or erythema nodosum. Erythema nodosum is a rash of red or reddish-purple bumps on your ankles and shins. The rash may be warm and tender to the touch.
                
Sarcoidosis is somewhat more common in women than in men. The disease usually develops between the ages of 20 and 50. People who have a family history of sarcoidosis also are at higher risk for the disease.
                
Researchers have looked for a link between sarcoidosis and exposure to workplace and environmental factors. However, no clear link has been found.