X-linked scapuloperoneal myopathy is an inherited muscular dystrophy characterized by weakness and wasting of the muscles in the lower legs and the area of the shoulder blades. In some individuals, facial muscles may also be affected. While the progression varies from case to case, it tends to be relatively slow. Some cases of scapuloperoneal myopathy are caused by mutations in the FHL1 gene. These cases are inherited in an X-linked dominant manner. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for X-linked dominant scapuloperoneal myopathy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Adult onset - Arrhythmia - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Elevated serum creatine phosphokinase - EMG: myopathic abnormalities - Flexion contracture - Foot dorsiflexor weakness - Hyporeflexia - Lower limb muscle weakness - Myofibrillar myopathy - Scapular winging - Scapuloperoneal myopathy - Skeletal muscle atrophy - Slow progression - Steppage gait - Waddling gait - Weakness of facial musculature - X-linked dominant inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 X-linked dominant scapuloperoneal myopathy is caused by mutations in the FHL1 gene. The FHL1 gene is located on chromosome Xq26. This gene may be involved in muscle development or hypertrophy.
 There is no standard course of treatment for scapuloperoneal myopathy. Some patients may benefit from physical therapy or other therapeutic exercises.
MYH7-related scapuloperoneal myopathy is an inherited muscular dystrophy characterized by weakness and wasting of the muscles in the lower legs and the area of the shoulder blades. In some individuals, facial muscles may also be affected. While the progression varies from case to case, it tends to be relatively slow. Some cases of scapuloperoneal myopathy are caused by mutations in the MYH7 gene. Autosomal dominant inheritance is suggested in these cases. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for MYH7-related scapuloperoneal myopathy. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - EMG: myopathic abnormalities - Scapuloperoneal myopathy - Slow progression - Weakness of facial musculature - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 MYH7-related scapuloperoneal myopathy is caused by mutations in the MYH7 gene. This gene, located on chromosome 14q12, provides instructions for making a protein known as the cardiac beta ()-myosin heavy chain. This protein is found in heart (cardiac) muscle and in type I skeletal muscle fibers. Type I fibers, which are also known as slow-twitch fibers, are one of two types of fibers that make up skeletal muscles. Type I fibers are the primary component of skeletal muscles that are resistant to fatigue. For example, muscles involved in posture, such as the neck muscles that hold the head steady, are made predominantly of type I fibers.
 There is no standard course of treatment for scapuloperoneal myopathy. Some patients may benefit from physical therapy or other therapeutic exercises.