Scleroderma means hard skin. It is a group of diseases that cause abnormal growth of connective tissue. Connective tissue is the material inside your body that gives your tissues their shape and helps keep them strong. In scleroderma, the tissue gets hard or thick. It can cause swelling or pain in your muscles and joints.    Symptoms of scleroderma include        -  Calcium deposits in connective tissues    -  Raynaud's phenomenon, a narrowing of blood vessels in the hands or feet    -  Swelling of the esophagus, the tube between your throat and stomach    -  Thick, tight skin on your fingers    -  Red spots on your hands and face        No one knows what causes scleroderma. It is more common in women. It can be mild or severe. Doctors diagnose scleroderma using your medical history, a physical exam, lab tests, and a skin biopsy. There is no cure, but various treatments can control symptoms and complications.     NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Scleroderma. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the stomach 90% Acrocyanosis 90% Arthralgia 90% Arthritis 90% Autoimmunity 90% Cheilitis 90% Chest pain 90% Dry skin 90% Gangrene 90% Gingivitis 90% Lack of skin elasticity 90% Muscle weakness 90% Myalgia 90% Nausea and vomiting 90% Restrictive lung disease 90% Skin ulcer 90% Xerostomia 90% Abdominal pain 50% Abnormal pattern of respiration 50% Abnormal tendon morphology 50% Abnormality of the pericardium 50% Arrhythmia 50% Bowel incontinence 50% Chondrocalcinosis 50% Coronary artery disease 50% Cranial nerve paralysis 50% Decreased nerve conduction velocity 50% Feeding difficulties in infancy 50% Hyperkeratosis 50% Hypopigmented skin patches 50% Malabsorption 50% Mucosal telangiectasiae 50% Myositis 50% Nephropathy 50% Pulmonary fibrosis 50% Recurrent urinary tract infections 50% Telangiectasia of the skin 50% Urticaria 50% Weight loss 50% Behavioral abnormality 7.5% Cirrhosis 7.5% Congestive heart failure 7.5% Erectile abnormalities 7.5% Gastrointestinal hemorrhage 7.5% Gingival bleeding 7.5% Hematuria 7.5% Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 7.5% Memory impairment 7.5% Narrow mouth 7.5% Neoplasm of the lung 7.5% Osteolysis 7.5% Osteomyelitis 7.5% Peripheral neuropathy 7.5% Pulmonary hypertension 7.5% Pulmonary infiltrates 7.5% Renal insufficiency 7.5% Seizures 7.5% Skeletal muscle atrophy 7.5% Tracheoesophageal fistula 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Currently, there is not a cure for scleroderma, however treatments are available to relieve symptoms and limit damage. Treatment will vary depending on your symptoms.
Systemic scleroderma is an autoimmune disorder that affects the skin and internal organs. It is characterized by the buildup of scar tissue (fibrosis) in the skin and other organs. The fibrosis is caused by the body's production of too much collagen, which normally strengthens and supports connective tissues. The signs and symptoms of systemic scleroderma usually begin with episodes of Raynaud's phenomenon, which can occur weeks to years before fibrosis. This may be followed by puffy or swollen hands before the skin becomes thickened and hard. Fibrosis can also affect internal organs and can lead to impairment or failure of the affected organs. The most commonly affected organs are the esophagus, heart, lungs, and kidneys. There are three types of systemic scleroderma, defined by the tissues affected in the disorder. Diffuse cutaneous systemic sclerosis Limited cutaneous systemic sclerosis (which includes CREST syndrome) Limited systemic sclerosis (systemic sclerosis sine scleroderma)
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Systemic scleroderma. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the gastric mucosa 90% Acrocyanosis 90% Arthralgia 90% Arthritis 90% Atypical scarring of skin 90% Autoimmunity 90% Chest pain 90% Chondrocalcinosis 90% Edema 90% Hyperkeratosis 90% Lack of skin elasticity 90% Myalgia 90% Nausea and vomiting 90% Skeletal muscle atrophy 90% Weight loss 90% Abnormality of the myocardium 50% Abnormality of the pericardium 50% Carious teeth 50% Feeding difficulties in infancy 50% Gangrene 50% Malabsorption 50% Mucosal telangiectasiae 50% Myositis 50% Pulmonary fibrosis 50% Pulmonary infiltrates 50% Respiratory insufficiency 50% Skin ulcer 50% Telangiectasia of the skin 50% Trismus 50% Xerostomia 50% Abnormal renal physiology 7.5% Abnormal tendon morphology 7.5% Arrhythmia 7.5% Bowel incontinence 7.5% Coronary artery disease 7.5% Erectile abnormalities 7.5% Hypertensive crisis 7.5% Irregular hyperpigmentation 7.5% Migraine 7.5% Narrow mouth 7.5% Osteolysis 7.5% Osteomyelitis 7.5% Peripheral neuropathy 7.5% Pulmonary hypertension 7.5% Seizures 7.5% Abnormality of chromosome stability - Abnormality of the abdomen - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Calcinosis - Sclerodactyly - Scleroderma - Telangiectasia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The exact, underlying cause of systemic sclerosis is unknown. The cause appears to involve some injury to the cells that line blood vessels, resulting in excessive activation of dermal connective tissue cells, called fibroblasts. Fibroblasts normally produce collagen and other proteins. Build-up of collagen in the skin and other organs causes the signs and symptoms of the condition. It is suspected that scleroderma may develop from a variety of factors, which may include: Abnormal immune or inflammatory activity Genetic susceptibility: while no specific genes are thought to cause scleroderma, certain genes (or combination of genes) may increase a person's risk to be affected. However, the condition is not passed directly from parents to children. Environmental triggers: suspected triggers may include infections; injury; drugs (e.g. vitamin K, cocaine, penicillamine, appetite suppressants and some chemotherapeutic agents); and chemicals (e.g. silica, organic solvents, pesticides, aliphatic hydrocarbons and epoxy resin). Hormones: because women develop scleroderma more often than men, researchers suspect that hormones may play a role. However, the role of female hormones has not been proven. Widespread scleroderma can also occur in association with other autoimmune diseases, including systemic lupus erythematosus and polymyositis.
 Most cases of systemic scleroderma are sporadic and are not inherited. This means the condition typically occurs in people with no history of the condition in their family. Some people with systemic scleroderma have relatives with other autoimmune disorders, and a few cases of the condition have been reported to run in families. However, the condition is not caused by a single gene that is passed on to offspring. Multiple genetic and environmental factors likely interact to put someone at an increased risk to develop the condition.
 Because systemic scleroderma is not caused by a mutation in any one specific gene, clinical genetic testing to confirm a diagnosis or identify a "carrier" is not currently available.  Even if someone is known to carry a version of a gene that may make them susceptible to the condition, it does not mean they will definitely develop the condition. You can view a list of centers that may be involved in research projects on systemic scleroderma on Orphanet's Web site. You can also view a list of clinical trials involving people with systemic scleroderma on ClinicalTrials.gov. People interested in learning more about genes and genetic testing for systemic scleroderma should speak with a genetics professional.
The prevalence of systemic scleroderma is estimated to range from 50 to 300 cases per 1 million people. For reasons that are unknown, women are four times more likely to develop the condition than men.
Researchers have identified variations in several genes that may influence the risk of developing systemic scleroderma. The most commonly associated genes belong to a family of genes called the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) complex. The HLA complex helps the immune system distinguish the body's own proteins from proteins made by foreign invaders (such as viruses and bacteria). Each HLA gene has many different normal variations, allowing each person's immune system to react to a wide range of foreign proteins. Specific normal variations of several HLA genes seem to affect the risk of developing systemic scleroderma.  Normal variations in other genes related to the body's immune function, such as IRF5 and STAT4, are also associated with an increased risk of developing systemic scleroderma. Variations in the IRF5 gene are specifically associated with diffuse cutaneous systemic scleroderma, and a variation in the STAT4 gene is associated with limited cutaneous systemic scleroderma. The IRF5 and STAT4 genes both play a role in initiating an immune response when the body detects a foreign invader (pathogen) such as a virus.  It is not known how variations in the associated genes contribute to the increased risk of systemic scleroderma. Variations in multiple genes may work together to increase the risk of developing the condition, and researchers are working to identify and confirm other genes associated with increased risk. In addition, a combination of genetic and environmental factors seems to play a role in developing systemic scleroderma.
Most cases of systemic scleroderma are sporadic, which means they occur in people with no history of the condition in their family. However, some people with systemic scleroderma have close relatives with other autoimmune disorders.  A small percentage of all cases of systemic scleroderma have been reported to run in families; however, the condition does not have a clear pattern of inheritance. Multiple genetic and environmental factors likely play a part in determining the risk of developing this condition. As a result, inheriting a genetic variation linked with systemic scleroderma does not mean that a person will develop the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of systemic scleroderma:  - Cedars-Sinai Medical Center  - Genetic Testing Registry: Scleroderma, familial progressive  - University of Maryland Medical Center   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care