Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a nervous system disease that attacks nerve cells called neurons in your brain and spinal cord. These neurons transmit messages from your brain and spinal cord to your voluntary muscles - the ones you can control, like in your arms and legs. At first, this causes mild muscle problems. Some people notice       -  Trouble walking or running     -  Trouble writing     -  Speech problems       Eventually, you lose your strength and cannot move. When muscles in your chest fail, you cannot breathe. A breathing machine can help, but most people with ALS die from respiratory failure.     The disease usually strikes between age 40 and 60. More men than women get it. No one knows what causes ALS. It can run in families, but usually it strikes at random. There is no cure. Medicines can relieve symptoms and, sometimes, prolong survival.     NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis type 6. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Fasciculations - Gait disturbance - Hyporeflexia - Neuronal loss in central nervous system - Proximal amyotrophy - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Juvenile primary lateral sclerosis is a rare disorder characterized by progressive weakness and stiffness of muscles in the arms, legs, and face. This disorder damages motor neurons, which are specialized nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord that control muscle movement. Symptoms begin in early childhood and progress over a period of 15 to 20 years. Juvenile primary lateral sclerosis is caused by mutations in the ALS2 gene. It is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
 Juvenile primary lateral sclerosis is a rare disorder characterized by progressive weakness and stiffness of muscles in the arms, legs, and face. Symptoms of juvenile primary lateral sclerosis begin in early childhood and progress over a period of 15 to 20 years. Early symptoms include clumsiness, muscle spasms, weakness and stiffness in the legs, and difficulty with balance. As symptoms progress, they include weakness and stiffness in the arms and hands, slurred speech, drooling, difficulty swallowing, and an inability to walk. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Juvenile primary lateral sclerosis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal pyramidal signs 90% Gait disturbance 90% Hemiplegia/hemiparesis 90% Hyperreflexia 90% Hypertonia 90% Incoordination 90% Muscle weakness 90% Pseudobulbar signs 90% Feeding difficulties in infancy 50% Neurological speech impairment 50% Abnormality of the urinary system 7.5% Skeletal muscle atrophy 7.5% Abnormal upper motor neuron morphology - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Babinski sign - Cerebral cortical atrophy - Childhood onset - Difficulty in tongue movements - Dysphagia - Juvenile onset - Pseudobulbar behavioral symptoms - Saccadic smooth pursuit - Slow progression - Spastic dysarthria - Spastic gait - Spastic tetraparesis - Spasticity of facial muscles - Spasticity of pharyngeal muscles - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Juvenile primary lateral sclerosis is caused by mutations in the ALS2 gene. The ALS2 gene provides instructions for making a protein called alsin. Alsin is abundant in motor neurons, but its function is not fully understood. Mutations in the ALS2 gene alter the instructions for producing alsin. As a result, alsin is unstable and decays rapidly, or it is disabled and cannot function properly. It is unclear how the loss of functional alsin protein damages motor neurons and causes juvenile primary lateral sclerosis.
How  Juvenile primary lateral sclerosis is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a type of motor neuron disease which leads to problems with muscle control and movement. Signs and symptoms of juvenile ALS tend to present by age 25 years or younger.  Unlike other types of ALS, juvenile ALS is not rapidly progressive. People with juvenile ALS can have a normal life expectancy. Juvenile ALS is often genetic and may be inherited in an autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive fashion.
Signs and symptoms of juvenile ALS vary but include slowly to very slowly progressive muscle weakness, increased muscle tone, Babinski reflex, muscle spasm (clonus), exaggerated reflexes, muscle wasting, and muscle twitching. Juvenile ALS usually does not affect thinking or mental processing, nor does it tend to cause sensory dysfunction (e.g., numbness or tingling). As the condition progresses muscle involvement can be severe. Some people with juvenile ALS, eventually experience muscle weakness in the face and throat. Some have experienced emotional liability (involuntary crying or laughing) and/or respiratory weakness.[133]
 Juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is often genetic and may be caused by mutations in the ALS2 or SETX genes. In some cases the underlying gene abnormality cannot be determined. Juvenile ALS may be inherited in an autosomal dominant (as in ALS type 4) or autosomal recessive (as in ALS type 2) fashion.
 Treatments and therapies are available to relieve symptoms and improve the quality of life of people with juvenile ALS. Medications, such as those that reduce fatigue and ease muscle cramps are available. Physical therapy and special equipment can be helpful. Multidisciplinary teams of health care professionals such as physicians; pharmacists; physical, occupational, and speech therapists; nutritionists; and social workers can help to develop personalized treatment plans. While the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved riluzole (Rilutek) for treatment of ALS, we found limited information regarding its use for juvenile ALS. We recommend that you discuss any questions regarding the risk/benefits of this drug with your healthcare provider.
Primary lateral sclerosis is a type of motor neuron disease, where nerve cells that control voluntary muscle movement breakdown and die. In primary lateral sclerosis only the upper motor neurons in the brain are affected. Symptoms often begin with problems in the legs (e.g., weakness, stiffness, spasticity, and balance problems), but may also start with hand clumsiness and changes in speech. The symptoms worsen gradually over time, however people with this condition have a normal life expectancy. Progression of symptoms varies from person to person, some people retain the ability to walk without assistance, others eventually require assistive devices such as canes or wheelchairs. Diagnosis requires extensive testing to exclude other diseases. Treatment may include baclofen and tizanidine to reduce spasticity, quinine or phenytoin to reduce cramps, as well as physical and speech therapy as required.
 There is no single test that confirms a diagnosis of primary lateral sclerosis (PLS). Because the disease can mimic signs and symptoms of other neurological diseases such as multiple sclerosis and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), several tests are done to rule out other diseases. After taking a careful record of an individual's medical history and performing a complete neurological examination, a doctor may order the following tests: Blood work. Blood tests are done to check for infections or other possible causes of muscle weakness. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and spine. An MRI or other imaging tests may reveal signs of nerve cell degeneration and look for other causes of symptoms, such as structural abnormalities, spinal cord compression, multiple sclerosis and spinal cord tumors. Motor and sensory nerve conduction studies. These tests use a low amount of electrical current to test how quickly the nerves carry impulses through the body, and can indicate damage to nerve cells. Electromyogram (EMG). During this test, the doctor inserts a needle electrode through the skin into various muscles. The electrical activity of the muscles is evaluated when they contract and when they're at rest. This test can measure the involvement of lower motor neurons, which can help to differentiate between PLS and ALS. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis. An analysis of the CSF, which is taken during a lumbar puncture in the lower back, can help to rule out multiple sclerosis and other causes of spasticity. After other diseases are ruled out, a doctor may make a preliminary diagnosis of PLS. Sometimes doctors wait three to four years before being sure of the diagnosis, because early ALS can look just like PLS until additional symptoms surface a few years later.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), also referred to as "Lou Gehrig's disease," is a progressive motor neuron disease which leads to problems with muscle control and movement. There are various types of ALS, which are distinguished by their signs and symptoms and their cause. Early symptoms may include muscle twitching, cramping, stiffness, or weakness, eventually followed by slurred speech and difficulty chewing or swallowing (dysphagia). As the disease progresses, individuals become weaker are are eventually wheelchair-dependent. Death often results from respiratory failure within 2 to 10 years after the onset of symptoms. Most affected individuals have a sporadic (not inherited) form of ALS; about 5-10% have a familial (inherited) form of the condition. Familial ALS may caused by mutations in any one of several genes and the pattern of inheritance varies depending on the gene involved. Treatment is generally supportive.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Degeneration of anterior horn cells - Degeneration of the lateral corticospinal tracts - Fasciculations - Heterogeneous - Hyperreflexia - Muscle cramps - Muscle weakness - Pseudobulbar paralysis - Skeletal muscle atrophy - Sleep apnea - Spasticity - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 In approximately 90-95% of cases the cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is unknown and is sporadic (occurring in individuals with no history of the condition in the family). The remaining 5-10% of cases are genetic (familial), often occurring in individuals with a family history of the condition. Mutations in any of several genes, including the C9orf72, SOD1, TARDBP, FUS, ANG, ALS2, SETX, and VAPB genes, can cause familial ALS and may contribute to the development of sporadic ALS. About 60% of individuals with familial ALS have an identifiable genetic mutation; the genetic cause in the remaining cases is unknown. The genes associated with ALS appear to play a role in how neurons function or are involved in regulating the production of various proteins. Over the years, various types of environmental exposures have been proposed as possible contributors to the cause of ALS, including mercury, manganese, products used in farming (fertilizers, insecticides, herbicides), and physical and dietary factors. Exposures have been suggested as a possible explanation for the increased incidence of ALS in Gulf War veterans. Further investigation is ongoing.
 About 90-95% percent of cases of ALS are not inherited and occur in individuals with no history of the condition in their family. The remaining 5-10% of cases are familial, and are thought to be caused by mutations in any one of several genes. The inheritance pattern associated with familial ALS varies depending on the disease-causing gene involved. Most familial cases are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that only one altered (mutated) copy of the disease-causing gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In most of these cases, an affected individual has one parent with the condition. When an individual with an autosomal dominant form of ALS has children, each child has a 50% (1 in 2) risk to inherited the mutated copy of the gene and be affected. Less frequently, ALS is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. In autosomal recessive inheritance, both copies of the disease-causing gene (typically one copy inherited from each parent) must have a mutation for the individual to be affected. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition, who presumably each carry one mutated copy of the gene, are referred to as carriers. Carriers typically do not have any signs or symptoms of the condition. When two carriers for the same condition are having children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be a carrier like each parent, and a 25% risk to not have the condition and not be a carrier. Autosomal recessive forms of ALS may be mistaken for non-inherited (sporadic) forms due to having a negative family history of the condition. In rare cases, ALS is inherited in an X-linked dominant manner. This occurs when the disease-causing gene is located on the X chromosome (a sex chromosome). Although females have 2 X chromosomes, having a mutation in one X chromosome is still sufficient to cause the condition. Males who have a mutation (and only one X chromosome) will have the condition. Usually, males with an X-linked dominant form of ALS experience more severe symptoms than females with the same form. Some individuals who do inherit a mutation known to cause ALS never develop signs and symptoms of ALS, although the reason for this is unclear. This phenomenon is referred to as reduced penetrance.
 Yes. Clinical genetic testing is currently available for several genes in which mutations are known to cause ALS. Genetic testing on a research basis is also available for select susceptibility genes associated with ALS. You can find laboratories offering clinical and research genetic testing for ALS on a Web site called GeneTests. To see GeneTests' list of the types of ALS for which genetic testing is available, click here. Click on "Testing" next to each type of ALS of interest to see a list of the laboratories that offer clinical testing. Click on "Research" next to each type of ALS of interest to see a list of the laboratories that offer research testing. Please note that most of the laboratories listed through GeneTests do not accept direct contact from patients and their families. Therefore, if you are interested in learning more, you will need to work with a health care provider or a genetics professional.
 The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved the first drug treatment for the diseaseriluzole (Rilutek). Riluzole is believed to reduce damage to motor neurons by decreasing the release of glutamate. Clinical trials with ALS patients showed that riluzole prolongs survival by several months, mainly in those with difficulty swallowing. The drug also extends the time before a patient needs ventilation support. Riluzole does not reverse the damage already done to motor neurons, and patients taking the drug must be monitored for liver damage and other possible side effects. Other treatments for ALS are designed to relieve symptoms and improve the quality of life for patients (palliative care). This supportive care is typically provided by multidisciplinary teams of health care professionals such as physicians; pharmacists; physical, occupational, and speech therapists; nutritionists; social workers; and home care and hospice nurses. Working with patients and caregivers, these teams can design an individualized plan of medical and physical therapy and provide special equipment aimed at keeping patients as mobile and comfortable as possible.
Primary lateral sclerosis (PLS) is a rare neuromuscular disease with slowly progressive weakness in voluntary muscle movement. PLS belongs to a group of disorders known as motor neuron diseases. PLS affects the upper motor neurons (also called corticospinal neurons) in the arms, legs, and face. It occurs when nerve cells in the motor regions of the cerebral cortex (the thin layer of cells covering the brain which is responsible for most higher level mental functions) gradually degenerate, causing movements to be slow and effortful. The disorder often affects the legs first, followed by the body, trunk, arms and hands, and, finally the bulbar muscles (muscles that control speech, swallowing, and chewing). Symptoms include weakness, muscle stiffness and spasticity, clumsiness, slowing of movement, and problems with balance and speech. PLS is more common in men than in women, with a varied gradual onset that generally occurs between ages 40 and 60. PLS progresses gradually over a number of years, or even decades. Scientists do not believe PLS has a simple hereditary cause. The diagnosis of PLS requires extensive testing to exclude other diseases. When symptoms begin, PLS may be mistaken for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) or spastic paraplegia. Most neurologists follow an affected individual's clinical course for at least 3 to 4 years before making a diagnosis of PLS..
Treatment for individuals with PLS is symptomatic. Muscle relaxants such as baclofen, tizanidine, and the benzodiazepines may reduce spasticity. Other drugs may relieve pain and antidepressants can help treat depression. Physical therapy, occupational therapy, and rehabilitation may prevent joint immobility and slow muscle weakness and atrophy. Assistive devices such as supports or braces, speech synthesizers, and wheelchairs ma help some people retain independence.. Speech therapy may be useful for those with involvement of the facial muscles.
PLS is not fatal. There is no cure and the progression of symptoms varies. Some people may retain the ability to walk without assistance, but others eventually require wheelchairs, canes, or other assistive devices.
The NINDS conducts a broad range of research on neuromuscular disorders such as PLS. This research is aimed at developing techniques to diagnose, treat, prevent, and ultimately cure these devastating diseases.
Juvenile primary lateral sclerosis is a rare disorder characterized by progressive weakness and tightness (spasticity) of muscles in the arms, legs, and face. The features of this disorder are caused by damage to motor neurons, which are specialized nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord that control muscle movement.  Symptoms of juvenile primary lateral sclerosis begin in early childhood and progress slowly over many years. Early symptoms include clumsiness, muscle weakness and spasticity in the legs, and difficulty with balance. As symptoms progress, the spasticity spreads to the arms and hands and individuals develop slurred speech, drooling, difficulty swallowing, and an inability to walk.
Juvenile primary lateral sclerosis is a rare disorder, with few reported cases.
Mutations in the ALS2 gene cause most cases of juvenile primary lateral sclerosis. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called alsin. Alsin is abundant in motor neurons, but its function is not fully understood. Mutations in the ALS2 gene alter the instructions for producing alsin. As a result, alsin is unstable and is quickly broken down, or it cannot function properly. It is unclear how the loss of functional alsin protein damages motor neurons and causes juvenile primary lateral sclerosis.
When caused by mutations in the ALS2 gene, juvenile primary lateral sclerosis is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of juvenile primary lateral sclerosis:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: ALS2-Related Disorders  - Genetic Testing Registry: Juvenile primary lateral sclerosis   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
About 5,000 people in the United States are diagnosed with ALS each year. Worldwide, this disorder occurs in 2 to 5 per 100,000 individuals. Only a small percentage of cases have a known genetic cause.  Among the Chamorro people of Guam and people from the Kii Peninsula of Japan, ALS-PDC can be 100 times more frequent than ALS is in other populations. ALS-PDC has not been reported outside of these populations.
About 90 to 95 percent of ALS cases are sporadic, which means they are not inherited.  An estimated 5 to 10 percent of ALS is familial and caused by mutations in one of several genes. The pattern of inheritance varies depending on the gene involved. Most cases are inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person has one parent with the condition. Some people who inherit a familial genetic mutation known to cause ALS never develop features of the condition. (This situation is known as reduced penetrance.) It is unclear why some people with a mutated gene develop the disease and other people with a mutated gene do not.  Less frequently, ALS is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Because an affected person's parents are not affected, autosomal recessive ALS is often mistaken for sporadic ALS even though it is caused by a familial genetic mutation.  Very rarely, ALS is inherited in an X-linked dominant pattern. X-linked conditions occur when the gene associated with the condition is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation in one of the two copies of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In males (who have only one X chromosome), a mutation in the only copy of the gene in each cell causes the disorder. In most cases, males tend to develop the disease earlier and have a decreased life expectancy compared with females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: ALS2-Related Disorders  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Overview  - Gene Review: Gene Review: C9orf72-Related Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Frontotemporal Dementia  - Gene Review: Gene Review: TARDBP-Related Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis  - Genetic Testing Registry: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis  - Genetic Testing Registry: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis type 1  - Massachusetts General Hospital: How is ALS Diagnosed?  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care