Summary : Your newborn infant has screening tests before leaving the hospital. There may be different tests depending on the state where you live. They include       - Tests on a few drops of blood from pricking the baby's heel. The tests look for inherited disorders. All states test for at least 30 of these conditions.    - A hearing test that measures the baby's response to sound    - A skin test that measures the level of oxygen in the blood. This can tell if the baby has a congenital heart defect.       These tests look for serious medical conditions. If not treated, some of these conditions can cause lifelong health problems. Others can cause early death. With early diagnosis, treatment can begin right away, before serious problems can occur or become permanent.    If a screening shows that your baby might have a condition, the health care provider or the state health department will call you. It is important to follow up quickly. Further testing can verify whether your baby has the condition. If so, treatment should start right away.     NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
Summary : Screenings are tests that look for diseases before you have symptoms. Screening tests can find diseases early, when they're easier to treat. You can get some screenings in your doctor's office. Others need special equipment, so you may need to go to a different office or clinic.    Some conditions that doctors commonly screen for include       - Breast cancer and cervical cancer in women    - Colorectal cancer    - Diabetes    - High blood pressure    - High cholesterol    - Osteoporosis    - Overweight and obesity    - Prostate cancer in men       Which tests you need depends on your age, your sex, your family history, and whether you have risk factors for certain diseases. After a screening test, ask when you will get the results and whom to talk to about them.    Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
Summary : The prostate is the gland below a man's bladder that produces fluid for semen. Cancer screening is looking for cancer before you have any symptoms. Cancer found early may be easier to treat.    There is no standard screening test for prostate cancer. Researchers are studying different tests to find those with the fewest risks and most benefits. One test is the digital rectal exam (DRE). The doctor or nurse inserts a lubricated, gloved finger into your rectum to feel the prostate for lumps or anything unusual. Another test is the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) blood test. Your PSA level may be high if you have prostate cancer. It can also be high if you have an enlarged prostate (BPH) or other prostate problems. If your screening results are abnormal, your doctor may do more tests, such as an ultrasound, MRI, or a biopsy.    Prostate cancer screening has risks:       - Finding prostate cancer may not improve your health or help you live longer    - The results can sometimes be wrong    - Follow-up tests, such as a biopsy, may have complications       You and your doctor should discuss your risk for prostate cancer, the pros and cons of the screening tests, and whether you should get them.