Caused By A Virus Shingles is caused by a virus called varicella-zoster virus -- the one that gave you chickenpox when you were a child. As you recovered from chickenpox, the sores healed and the other symptoms went away, but the virus remained. It is with you for life. The virus hides out in nerve cells, usually in the spine. But it can become active again. Somehow, the virus gets a signal that your immunity has become weakened. This triggers the reactivation. When the virus becomes active again, it follows a nerve path called a dermatome. The nerve path begins at specific points in the spine, continues around one side of the body, and surfaces at the nerve endings in the skin. The pattern of the rash reflects the location of that nerve path. Risk Factors The leading risk factor for shingles is a history of having had chickenpox. One out of every five people who have had chickenpox is likely to get shingles. Another risk factor is aging. As we age, our natural immunity gradually loses its ability to protect against infection. The shingles virus can take advantage of this and become active again. Conditions that weaken the immune system can also put people at risk for shingles. Shingles is especially dangerous for anyone who has had cancer, radiation treatments for cancer, HIV/AIDS, or a transplant operation. Stress is another factor that may contribute to outbreaks. While stress alone does not cause the outbreaks, shingles often occurs in people who have recently had a stressful event in their lives. Most cases of shingles occur in adults. Only about 5 percent of cases occur in children. With children, immune deficiency is the primary risk factor, but children who had chickenpox before they were one year old may also get shingles before they become adults. There have been studies of adults who had chickenpox as children and were later exposed to children who had chickenpox. Interestingly, that exposure apparently boosted the adult's immunity, which actually helped them avoid getting shingles later in life.
If You Suspect Shingles  If you suspect you have shingles, see your healthcare provider within 72 hours of the first sign of the rash.Treatment with antiviral medications can reduce the severity of the nerve damage and speed healing. But to be effective, they must be started as soon as possible after the rash appears. (Watch the video to learn more about shingles treatments. To enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. To reduce the video, press the Escape (Esc) button on your keyboard.) Antivirals and Other Treatments At the early stage of shingles, a healthcare provider will usually prescribe antiviral pills. These antiviral medicines include acyclovir, valacyclovir, or famcyclovir, Your healthcare provider, may also prescribe drugs to relieve pain. Wet compresses, calamine lotion, and colloidal oatmeal baths may help relieve some of the itching. Patients with long-term pain may also be treated with numbing patches, tricyclic antidepressants, and gabapentin, an anti-seizure medication. While these treatments can reduce the symptoms of shingles, they are not a cure. The antivirals do weaken the virus and its effects, but the outbreak still tends to run its course. Good hygiene, including daily bathing, can help prevent bacterial infections. It is a good idea to keep fingernails clean and well-trimmed to reduce scratching. Shingles Vaccine The shingles vaccine is NOT recommended if you have active shingles or pain that continues after the rash is gone. To learn more about the shingles vaccine, see the chapter on "Prevention."
Shingles -- also called varicella-zoster -- is a painful skin disease caused by a reactivation of the chickenpox virus. It is distinctive because it affects only one side of the body. The early signs of shingles usually develop in three stages: severe pain or tingling, possibly itchy rash, and blisters that look like chickenpox. (Watch the video to learn more about shingles. To enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. To reduce the video, press the Escape (Esc) button on your keyboard.)
Shingles is very common. Fifty percent of all Americans will have had shingles by the time they are 80. While shingles occurs in people of all ages, it is most common in 60-to 80-year-olds. In fact, one out of every three people 60 years or older will get shingles.
The first symptoms usually include burning, itching, or tingling sensations on the back, chest, or around the rib cage or waist. In other cases, it can be the face or eye area that is involved. The affected area can become extremely painful. This is when most people go to a healthcare provider to find out what is causing the pain. Some people report feeling feverish and weak during the early stages. Usually within 48 to 72 hours, a red, blotchy rash develops on the affected area. The rash erupts into small blisters that look like chickenpox. The blisters tend to be clustered in one specific area, rather than being scattered all over the body like chickenpox. The torso or face are the parts most likely to be affected, but on occasion, shingles breaks out in the lower body. The burning sensation in the rash area is often accompanied by shooting pains. After the blisters erupt, the open sores take a week or two to crust over. The sores are usually gone within another two weeks. The pain may diminish somewhat, but it often continues for months -- and can go on for years.
A typical shingles case is easy to diagnose. A healthcare provider might suspect shingles if - the rash is only on one side of the body   - the rash erupts along one of the many nerve paths, called dermatomes, that stem from the spine. the rash is only on one side of the body the rash erupts along one of the many nerve paths, called dermatomes, that stem from the spine. A healthcare provider usually confirms a diagnosis of shingles if the person also - reports a sharp, burning pain   - has had chickenpox   - has blisters that look like chickenpox   - is elderly. reports a sharp, burning pain has had chickenpox has blisters that look like chickenpox is elderly. Other symptoms of shingles can include -  fever  -  headache  -  chills  -  upset stomach.  fever headache chills upset stomach. Some people go to their healthcare provider because of burning, painful, itchy sensations on one area of skin, but they don't get a rash. If there is no rash, the symptoms can be difficult to diagnose because they can be mistaken for numerous other diseases. In cases where there is no rash or the diagnosis is questionable, healthcare providers can do a blood test. If there is a rash, but it does not resemble the usual shingles outbreak, a healthcare provider can examine skin scrapings from the sores.
The most common complication of shingles is pain -- a condition called post-herpetic neuralgia (PHN). People with PHN have severe pain in the areas where they had the shingles rash, even after the rash clears up. In most patients, the pain usually clears up in a few weeks or months, but some people can have pain from PHN for years. Shingles may also lead to other serious complications. - Outbreaks that start on the face or eyes can cause vision or hearing problems. Even permanent blindness can result if the cornea of the eye is affected.  -  Bacterial infection of the open sores can lead to scarring.   - In a very small number of cases, bacteria can cause more serious conditions, including toxic shock syndrome and necrotizing fasciitis, a severe infection that destroys the soft tissue under the skin.  - The burning waves of pain, loss of sleep, and interference with even basic life activities can cause serious depression.  - In patients with immune deficiency, the rash can be much more extensive than usual and the illness can be complicated by pneumonia. These cases are more serious, but they are rarely fatal.  - Very rarely, shingles can also lead to pneumonia, brain inflammation (encephalitis), or death.  Outbreaks that start on the face or eyes can cause vision or hearing problems. Even permanent blindness can result if the cornea of the eye is affected. Bacterial infection of the open sores can lead to scarring. In a very small number of cases, bacteria can cause more serious conditions, including toxic shock syndrome and necrotizing fasciitis, a severe infection that destroys the soft tissue under the skin. The burning waves of pain, loss of sleep, and interference with even basic life activities can cause serious depression. In patients with immune deficiency, the rash can be much more extensive than usual and the illness can be complicated by pneumonia. These cases are more serious, but they are rarely fatal. Very rarely, shingles can also lead to pneumonia, brain inflammation (encephalitis), or death.
Yes. In May 2006, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved a vaccine to prevent shingles in people age 60 and older. The vaccine, called Zostavax, is designed to boost the immune system and protect older adults from getting shingles later on. Even if you have had shingles, you can still get the shingles vaccine to help prevent future occurrences of the disease. There is no maximum age for getting the vaccine, and only a single dose is recommended. The shingles vaccine is NOT recommended if you have active shingles or pain that continues after the rash is gone. (Watch the video to learn more about shingles treatments. To enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. To reduce the video, press the Escape (Esc) button on your keyboard.) The shingles vaccine is available in pharmacies and doctor's offices. Talk with your healthcare professional if you have questions about the vaccine. To learn more about the vaccine,  see "Zostavax: Questions and Answers."
For most healthy people who receive treatment soon after the outbreak of blisters, the lesions heal, the pain subsides within 3 to 5 weeks, and the blisters often leave no scars. However, shingles is a serious threat in immunosuppressed individuals  for example, those with HIV infection or who are receiving cancer treatments that can weaken their immune systems. People who receive organ transplants are also vulnerable to shingles because they are given drugs that suppress the immune system. 
                
A person with a shingles rash can pass the virus to someone, usually a child, who has never had chickenpox, but the child will develop chickenpox, not shingles. A person with chickenpox cannot give shingles to someone else. Shingles comes from the virus hiding inside the person's body, not from an outside source.