Shock happens when not enough blood and oxygen can get to your organs and tissues. It causes very low blood pressure and may be life threatening. It often happens along with a serious injury.     There are several kinds of shock. Hypovolemic shock happens when you lose a lot of blood or fluids. Causes include internal or external bleeding, dehydration, burns, and severe vomiting and/or diarrhea. Septic shock is caused by infections in the bloodstream. A severe allergic reaction can cause anaphylactic shock. An insect bite or sting might cause it. Cardiogenic shock happens when the heart cannot pump blood effectively. This may happen after a heart attack. Neurogenic shock is caused by damage to the nervous system.    Symptoms of shock include       - Confusion or lack of alertness    - Loss of consciousness    - Sudden and ongoing rapid heartbeat    - Sweating    - Pale skin    - A weak pulse    - Rapid breathing    - Decreased or no urine output    - Cool hands and feet       Shock is a life-threatening medical emergency and it is important to get help right away. Treatment of shock depends on the cause.    NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
The most common risk factor for cardiogenic shock is having a heart attack. If you've had a heart attack, the following factors can further increase your risk for cardiogenic shock:
                
Older age
                
A history of heart attacks or heart failure
                
Coronary heart disease that affects all of the hearts major blood vessels
                
High blood pressure
                
Diabetes
                
Women who have heart attacks are at higher risk for cardiogenic shock than men who have heart attacks.
A lack of oxygen-rich blood reaching the brain, kidneys, skin, and other parts of the body causes the signs and symptoms of cardiogenic shock.
                
Some of the typical signs and symptoms of shock usually include at least two or more of the following:
                
Confusion or lack of alertness
                
Loss of consciousness
                
A sudden and ongoing rapid heartbeat
                
Sweating
                
Pale skin
                
A weak pulse
                
Rapid breathing
                
Decreased or no urine output
                
Cool hands and feet
                
Any of these alone is unlikely to be a sign or symptom of shock.
                
If you or someone else is having these signs and symptoms, call 911 right away for emergency treatment. Prompt medical care can save your life and prevent or limit organ damage.
The best way to prevent cardiogenic shock is to lower your risk for coronary heart disease (CHD) and heart attack. (For more information, go to the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute's "Your Guide to a Healthy Heart.")
                
If you already have CHD, its important to get ongoing treatment from a doctor who has experience treating heart problems.
                
If you have a heart attack, you should get treatment right away to try to prevent cardiogenic shock and other possible complications.
                
Act in time. Know the warning signs of a heart attack so you can act fast to get treatment. Many heart attack victims wait 2 hours or more after their symptoms begin before they seek medical help. Delays in treatment increase the risk of complications and death.
                
If you think you're having a heart attack, call 911 for help. Don't drive yourself or have friends or family drive you to the hospital. Call an ambulance so that medical personnel can begin life-saving treatment on the way to the emergency room.