SHORT syndrome is a condition characterized by multiple abnormalities that affect several parts of the body. The term SHORT is an acronym with each letter representing a common feature in affected individuals: (S) short stature; (H) hyperextensibility of joints and/or hernia (inguinal); (O) ocular depression (deep-set eyes); (R) Rieger anomaly (defective development of the anterior chamber of the eye that can lead to glaucoma); and (T) teething delay. Other features commonly present include a triangular face, small chin with a dimple, loss of fat under the skin (lipodystrophy), abnormal position of the ears, hearing loss and delayed speech. It is caused by mutations in the PIK3R1 gene. Inheritance is autosomal dominant. Treatment focuses on the specific symptoms present in each individual.
How  SHORT syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant  pattern. For conditions with autosomal dominant inheritance, one abnormal copy of the causative gene in each cell is sufficient to cause signs and symptoms of the condition. The abnormal copy of the gene may be inherited from an affected parent, or it may occur for the first time in an affected individual. When an individual with an autosomal dominant condition has children, each child has a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be affected.
 There is no formal criteria for diagnosis yet. The term SHORT syndrome was first created to reflect several of the features of the original reported cases: Short stature, Hyperextensibility, Ocular depression (deeply set eyes), Rieger anomaly, and Teething delay. However, it is now recognized that all of these five features are neither required to make the diagnosis nor necessarily the most specific features of SHORT syndrome. The features most consistently observed in SHORT syndrome include: Intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) Short stature Partial lipodystrophy Facial characteristics: Face with triangular shape, prominent forehead, deep-set eyes, nose with a narrow low-hanging tip and thin nasal alae, small chin with a central dimple and large ears that are low-set. Other frequent features include: Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly or related eye anomalies Delayed dentition Diabetes. In general, the facial features allow to make a suspicion of the diagnosis. Diagnosis is confirmed with the genetic testing showing a mutation in the PIK3R1 gene.
Short bowel syndrome is a group of problems related to poor absorption of nutrients. Short bowel syndrome typically occurs in people who have
                
- had at least half of their small intestine removed and sometimes all or part of their large intestine removed  - significant damage of the small intestine  - poor motility, or movement, inside the intestines
                
Short bowel syndrome may be mild, moderate, or severe, depending on how well the small intestine is working.
                
People with short bowel syndrome cannot absorb enough water, vitamins, minerals, protein, fat, calories, and other nutrients from food. What nutrients the small intestine has trouble absorbing depends on which section of the small intestine has been damaged or removed.
The main cause of short bowel syndrome is surgery to remove a portion of the small intestine. This surgery can treat intestinal diseases, injuries, or birth defects.
                
Some children are born with an abnormally short small intestine or with part of their bowel missing, which can cause short bowel syndrome. In infants, short bowel syndrome most commonly occurs following surgery to treat necrotizing enterocolitis, a condition in which part of the tissue in the intestines is destroyed.1
                
Short bowel syndrome may also occur following surgery to treat conditions such as
                
- cancer and damage to the intestines caused by cancer treatment  - Crohn's disease, a disorder that causes inflammation, or swelling, and irritation of any part of the digestive tract  - gastroschisis, which occurs when the intestines stick out of the body through one side of the umbilical cord  - internal hernia, which occurs when the small intestine is displaced into pockets in the abdominal lining  - intestinal atresia, which occurs when a part of the intestines doesn't form completely  - intestinal injury from loss of blood flow due to a blocked blood vessel  - intestinal injury from trauma  - intussusception, in which one section of either the large or small intestine folds into itself, much like a collapsible telescope  - meconium ileus, which occurs when the meconium, a newborn's first stool, is thicker and stickier than normal and blocks the ileum  - midgut volvulus, which occurs when blood supply to the middle of the small intestine is completely cut off  - omphalocele, which occurs when the intestines, liver, or other organs stick out through the navel, or belly button
                
Even if a person does not have surgery, disease or injury can damage the small intestine.
Short bowel syndrome is a rare condition. Each year, short bowel syndrome affects about three out of every million people.1
The main symptom of short bowel syndrome is diarrhealoose, watery stools. Diarrhea can lead to dehydration, malnutrition, and weight loss. Dehydration means the body lacks enough fluid and electrolyteschemicals in salts, including sodium, potassium, and chlorideto work properly. Malnutrition is a condition that develops when the body does not get the right amount of vitamins, minerals, and nutrients it needs to maintain healthy tissues and organ function. Loose stools contain more fluid and electrolytes than solid stools. These problems can be severe and can be life threatening without proper treatment.
                
Other signs and symptoms may include
                
- bloating  - cramping  - fatigue, or feeling tired  - foul-smelling stool  - heartburn  - too much gas  - vomiting  - weakness
                
People with short bowel syndrome are also more likely to develop food allergies and sensitivities, such as lactose intolerance. Lactose intolerance is a condition in which people have digestive symptomssuch as bloating, diarrhea, and gasafter eating or drinking milk or milk products.
                
More information is provided in the NIDDK health topic, Lactose Intolerance.
The complications of short bowel syndrome may include
                
- malnutrition  - peptic ulcerssores on the lining of the stomach or duodenum caused by too much gastric acid  - kidney stonessolid pieces of material that form in the kidneys  - small intestinal bacterial overgrowtha condition in which abnormally large numbers of bacteria grow in the small intestine
                

                
Seek Help for Signs or Symptoms of Severe Dehydration   People who have any signs or symptoms of severe dehydration should call or see a health care provider right away:   - excessive thirst   - dark-colored urine   - infrequent urination   - lethargy, dizziness, or faintness   - dry skin    Infants and children are most likely to become dehydrated. Parents or caretakers should watch for the following signs and symptoms of dehydration:   - dry mouth and tongue   - lack of tears when crying   - infants with no wet diapers for 3 hours or more   - infants with a sunken soft spot   - unusually cranky or drowsy behavior   - sunken eyes or cheeks   - fever    If left untreated, severe dehydration can cause serious health problems:   - organ damage   - shockwhen low blood pressure prevents blood and oxygen from getting to organs   - comaa sleeplike state in which a person is not conscious
People can ask their health care providers about surgical techniques that minimize scar tissue. Scientists have not yet found a way to prevent short bowel syndrome that is present at birth, as its cause is unknown.
Researchers have not found that eating, diet, and nutrition play a role in causing or preventing short bowel syndrome.