Sialidosis is a severe inherited disorder that affects many organs and tissues, including the nervous system. This disorder is divided into two types, which are distinguished by the age at which symptoms appear and the severity of features. Sialidosis type I is the less severe form of this condition. People with this condition typically develop signs and symptoms of sialidosis in their teens or twenties. Characteristic features may include sudden involuntary muscle contractions (myoclonus), distinctive red spots (cherry-red macules) in the eyes, and sometimes additional neurological findings. Sialidosis type I is caused by mutations in the NEU1 gene. Individuals with sialidosis type I have mutations that result in some functional NEU1 enzyme. The condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. It does not affect intelligence or life expectancy.
 There is no specific treatment for sialidosis. Management should be multidisciplinary and directed at supportive care and symptomatic relief. Overall health maintenance should be a priority, with seizure control as necessary. Myoclonic seizures often respond poorly to treatment with anticonvulsant medications.
The overall prevalence of sialidosis is unknown. Sialidosis type I appears to be more common in people with Italian ancestry.
Mutations in the NEU1 gene cause sialidosis. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called neuraminidase 1 (NEU1), which is found in lysosomes. Lysosomes are compartments within the cell that use enzymes to digest and recycle materials. The NEU1 enzyme helps break down large sugar molecules attached to certain proteins by removing a substance known as sialic acid.  Mutations in the NEU1 gene lead to a shortage (deficiency) of the NEU1 enzyme. When this enzyme is lacking, sialic acid-containing compounds accumulate inside lysosomes. Conditions such as sialidosis that cause molecules to build up inside lysosomes are called lysosomal storage disorders. People with sialidosis type II have mutations that severely reduce or eliminate NEU1 enzyme activity. Individuals with sialidosis type I have mutations that result in some functional NEU1 enzyme. It is unclear exactly how the accumulation of large molecules within lysosomes leads to the signs and symptoms of sialidosis.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of sialidosis:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Sialidosis type I  - Genetic Testing Registry: Sialidosis, type II  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Ascites  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hydrops Fetalis   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care