Herpes is an infection that is caused by a herpes simplex virus (HSV). Oral herpes causes cold sores around the mouth or face. Genital herpes affects the genitals, buttocks or anal area. Genital herpes is a sexually transmitted disease (STD). It affects the genitals, buttocks or anal area. Other herpes infections can affect the eyes, skin, or other parts of the body. The virus can be dangerous in newborn babies or in people with weak immune systems.     There are two types of HSV:       - HSV type 1 most commonly causes cold sores. It can also cause genital herpes.    - HSV type 2 is the usual cause of genital herpes, but it also can infect the mouth.       HSV spreads through direct contact. Some people have no symptoms. Others get sores near the area where the virus has entered the body. They turn into blisters, become itchy and painful, and then heal.    Most people have outbreaks several times a year. Over time, you get them less often. Medicines to help your body fight the virus can help lessen symptoms and decrease outbreaks.
Herpes simplex encephalitis is a rare neurological condition that is characterized by inflammation of the brain (encephalitis). People affected by this condition may experience a headache and fever for up to 5 days, followed by personality and behavioral changes; seizures; hallucinations; and altered levels of consciousness. Without early diagnosis and treatment, severe brain damage or even death may occur. Herpes simplex encephalitis is caused by a virus called the herpes simplex virus. Most cases are associated with herpes simplex virus type I (the cause of cold sores or fever blisters), although rare cases can be caused by herpes simplex virus type II (genital herpes). It is poorly understood why some people who are infected with herpes simplex virus develop herpes simplex encephalitis while others do not. Changes (mutations) in genes such as TLR3 and TRAF3 have been observed suggesting there may be a genetic component in some cases. Treatment consists of antiviral therapy.