Singleton Merten syndrome is an extremely rare, multisystem disorder. The major characteristics are tooth abnormalities (dental dysplasia); calcifications in the aorta and certain valves of the heart (i.e., aortic and mitral valves); and progressive thinning and loss of protein of the bones (osteoporosis), especially the upper and back portions of the skull. Other physical findings may include generalized muscle weakness; progressive muscle atrophy; growth delay; delays in motor development; skin conditions; and/or malformation of the hips and/or feet. It appears to occur sporadically (in individuals with no history of the condition in their family) but in some cases, autosomal dominant inheritance has been suggested. Treatment is typically directed toward the specific symptoms that are present in each individual.
 The diagnosis of Singleton Merten syndrome may be suspected during infancy based upon the identification of characteristic physical findings (i.e., muscle weakness, muscle atrophy, dental abnormalities, and skeletal changes). A diagnosis may be confirmed by a thorough clinical evaluation, a detailed patient history, and/or a variety of specialized tests. The identification of calcium deposits in the aorta, in association with the other findings described above, strongly suggests a diagnosis of Singleton Merten syndrome. X-ray tests may be used to confirm the presence and extent of calcifications in the aorta. Obstruction or narrowing (stenosis) of the heart valves, particularly the aortic and mitral valves, may be confirmed by cardiac catheterization. During this procedure, a small hollow tube (catheter) is inserted into a large vein and threaded through the blood vessels leading to the heart. This procedure allows physicians to determine the rate of blood flow through the heart and measure the pressure within the heart. X-ray studies may also be performed to confirm the presence and extent of osteoporosis. Osteoporosis may be suspected when bone fractures occur more frequently than usual. X-ray tests may also reveal abnormal widening of the hollow parts of the bones that contain soft fatty tissue (bone marrow cavities) within the bones of the hands and/or feet.
 The treatment of Singleton Merten syndrome is directed toward the specific symptoms that are apparent in each individual. Treatment may require the coordinated efforts of a team of specialists. Pediatricians, surgeons, specialists who diagnose and treat abnormalities of the heart (cardiologists), dental specialists, physical therapists, specialists who diagnose and treat conditions of the skin (dermatologists), and other health care professionals may need to systematically and comprehensively plan an affected child's treatment. Specific therapies for the treatment of Singleton Merten syndrome are symptomatic and supportive. Special services that may be beneficial to affected children may include special social support, physical therapy, and other medical, social, and/or vocational services. Genetic counseling would be of benefit for affected individuals and their families.