Sjgren syndrome is a relatively common disorder; it occurs in 0.1 to 4 percent of the population. It is difficult to determine the exact prevalence because the characteristic features of this disorder, dry eyes and dry mouth, can also be caused by many other conditions. Women develop Sjgren syndrome about 10 times more often than men; the specific reason for this difference is unknown but likely involves the effects of sex hormones on immune system function.
Sjgren syndrome is thought to result from a combination of genetic and environmental factors; however, no associations between specific genetic changes and the development of Sjgren syndrome have been confirmed. Researchers believe that variations in many genes affect the risk of developing Sjgren syndrome, but that development of the condition may be triggered by something in the environment. In particular, viral or bacterial infections, which activate the immune system, may have the potential to encourage the development of Sjgren syndrome in susceptible individuals. The genetic variations that increase susceptibility may reduce the body's ability to turn off the immune response when it is no longer needed.
A predisposition to develop autoimmune disorders can be passed through generations in families. Relatives of people with Sjgren syndrome are at an increased risk of developing autoimmune diseases, although they are not necessarily more likely to develop Sjgren syndrome in particular. The inheritance pattern of this predisposition is unknown.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Sjgren syndrome:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Sjgren's syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Schirmer's Test  - National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research: Sjgren's Syndrome Clinic  - Sjgren's Syndrome Foundation: Treatments   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care