The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Platyspondylic lethal skeletal dysplasia Torrance type. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of epiphysis morphology 90% Abnormality of pelvic girdle bone morphology 90% Abnormality of the metacarpal bones 90% Abnormality of the metaphyses 90% Brachydactyly syndrome 90% Micromelia 90% Narrow chest 90% Platyspondyly 90% Short distal phalanx of finger 90% Short stature 90% Short thorax 90% Short toe 90% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the lungs 50% Depressed nasal bridge 50% Genu varum 50% Hydrops fetalis 50% Low-set, posteriorly rotated ears 50% Malar flattening 50% Polyhydramnios 50% Sprengel anomaly 50% Cleft palate 7.5% Abnormality of the abdominal wall - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Coarse facial features - Decreased cranial base ossification - Disc-like vertebral bodies - Flat acetabular roof - Hypoplastic ilia - Hypoplastic ischia - Hypoplastic pubic bone - Lethal skeletal dysplasia - Macrocephaly - Metaphyseal cupping - Neonatal short-limb short stature - Protuberant abdomen - Severe limb shortening - Severe platyspondyly - Short long bone - Short neck - Short ribs - Thin ribs - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Lethal short limb skeletal dysplasia Al Gazali type. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Atresia of the external auditory canal - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Bilateral talipes equinovarus - Lethal skeletal dysplasia - Limb undergrowth - Macrocephaly - Mesomelia - Opacification of the corneal stroma - Platyspondyly - Shortening of all metacarpals - Shortening of all phalanges of fingers - Wide anterior fontanel - Wormian bones - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Platyspondylic lethal skeletal dysplasia, Torrance type is a severe disorder of bone growth. People with this condition have very short arms and legs, underdeveloped pelvic bones, and unusually short fingers and toes (brachydactyly). This disorder is also characterized by flattened spinal bones (platyspondyly) and an exaggerated curvature of the lower back (lordosis). Infants with this condition are born with a small chest with short ribs that can restrict the growth and expansion of the lungs.  As a result of these serious health problems, some affected fetuses do not survive to term. Infants born with platyspondylic lethal skeletal dysplasia, Torrance type usually die at birth or shortly thereafter from respiratory failure. A few affected people with milder signs and symptoms have lived into adulthood.
This condition is very rare; only a few affected individuals have been reported worldwide.
Platyspondylic lethal skeletal dysplasia, Torrance type is one of a spectrum of skeletal disorders caused by mutations in the COL2A1 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that forms type II collagen. This type of collagen is found mostly in the clear gel that fills the eyeball (the vitreous) and in cartilage. Cartilage is a tough, flexible tissue that makes up much of the skeleton during early development. Most cartilage is later converted to bone, except for the cartilage that continues to cover and protect the ends of bones and is present in the nose and external ears. Type II collagen is essential for the normal development of bones and other connective tissues that form the body's supportive framework.  All of the COL2A1 mutations that have been found to cause platyspondylic lethal skeletal dysplasia, Torrance type occur in a region of the protein called the C-propeptide domain. These mutations interfere with the assembly of type II collagen molecules, reducing the amount of this type of collagen in the body. Instead of forming collagen molecules, the abnormal COL2A1 protein builds up in cartilage cells (chondrocytes). These changes disrupt the normal development of bones and other connective tissues, leading to the skeletal abnormalities characteristic of platyspondylic lethal skeletal dysplasia, Torrance type.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of platyspondylic lethal skeletal dysplasia, Torrance type:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Platyspondylic lethal skeletal dysplasia Torrance type  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Lordosis   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care