Snyder-Robinson syndrome is an inherited condition that is characterized by intellectual disability, muscle and bone abnormalities, and other problems with development. It only occurs in males. Affected individuals have delayed development that begins in early childhood. Speech difficulties are common. Low muscle tone (hypotonia) and muscle mass leads to difficulty walking and an unsteady gait. Other features include thinning of the bones (osteoporosis), an abnormal curvature of the spine (kyphoscoliosis), and unusual facial features including a prominent lower lip, cleft palate, and facial asymmetry. Snyder-Robinson syndrome is caused by mutations in the SMS gene and is inherited in an X-linked recessive fashion.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Snyder-Robinson syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the pinna - Bifid uvula - Broad-based gait - Cleft palate - Cryptorchidism - Decreased muscle mass - Dental crowding - Dysarthria - Facial asymmetry - High, narrow palate - Hyperextensibility of the finger joints - Hypertelorism - Intellectual disability - Kyphoscoliosis - Long fingers - Long hallux - Long palm - Mandibular prognathia - Muscular hypotonia - Narrow palm - Nasal speech - Osteoporosis - Pectus carinatum - Pectus excavatum - Phenotypic variability - Recurrent fractures - Seizures - Severe Myopia - Short philtrum - Short stature - Talipes equinovarus - Tall stature - Thick lower lip vermilion - Webbed neck - Wide intermamillary distance - X-linked recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Snyder-Robinson syndrome is a rare condition; its prevalence is unknown. About 10 affected families have been identified worldwide.
Snyder-Robinson syndrome results from mutations in the SMS gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called spermine synthase. This enzyme is involved in the production of spermine, which is a type of small molecule called a polyamine. Polyamines have many critical functions within cells. Studies suggest that these molecules play roles in cell growth and division, the production of new proteins, the repair of damaged tissues, the function of molecules called ion channels, and the controlled self-destruction of cells (apoptosis). Polyamines appear to be necessary for normal development and function of the brain and other parts of the body.  Mutations in the SMS gene greatly reduce or eliminate the activity of spermine synthase, which decreases the amount of spermine in cells. A shortage of this polyamine clearly impacts normal development, including the development of the brain, muscles, and bones, but it is unknown how it leads to the specific signs and symptoms of Snyder-Robinson syndrome.
This condition is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. The gene associated with this condition is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. No cases of Snyder-Robinson syndrome in females have been reported.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Snyder-Robinson syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Snyder-Robinson Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Snyder Robinson syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care