Sotos syndrome is a condition characterized mainly by distinctive facial features; overgrowth in childhood; and learning disabilities or delayed development. Facial features may include a long, narrow face; a high forehead; flushed (reddened) cheeks; a small, pointed chin; and down-slanting palpebral fissures. Affected infants and children tend to grow quickly; they are significantly taller than their siblings and peers and have a large head. Other signs and symptoms may include intellectual disability; behavioral problems; problems with speech and language; and/or weak muscle tone (hypotonia). Sotos syndrome is usually caused by a mutation in the NSD1 gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. About 95% of cases are due to a new mutation in the affected person and occur sporadically (are not inherited).
How  Sotos syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that having a mutation in only one of the 2 copies of the responsible gene (the NSD1 gene) is enough to cause signs and symptoms of the condition. 95% of people with Sotos syndrome do not inherit the condition from a parent. In these cases, the condition is the result of a new (de novo) mutation that occurred for the first time in the affected person. Only about 5% of people with Sotos syndrome have an affected parent and inherit the condition from that parent. If a parent of an affected person with an identified NSD1 mutation does not have any features of Sotos syndrome, that parent is very unlikely to have a mutation in the gene. This can be confirmed with genetic testing if the mutation has been identified in the child. If a person with Sotos syndrome has children, each child has a 50% (1 in 2) chance to inherit the mutation. However, the specific features and severity can vary from one generation to the next, so it is not possible to predict how a child will be affected.
Sotos syndrome (cerebral gigantism) is a rare genetic disorder caused by mutation in the NSD1 gene on chromosome 5. It is characterized by excessive physical growth during the first few years of life. Children with Sotos syndrome tend to be large at birth and are often taller, heavier, and have larger heads (macrocrania) than is normal for their age. Symptoms of the disorder, which vary among individuals, include a disproportionately large and long head with a slightly protrusive forehead and pointed chin, large hands and feet, hypertelorism (an abnormally increased distance between the eyes), and down-slanting eyes. The disorder is often accompanied by mild cognitive impairment; delayed motor, cognitive, and social development; hypotonia (low muscle tone), and speech impairments. Clumsiness, an awkward gait, and unusual aggressiveness or irritability may also occur. Although most cases of Sotos syndrome occur sporadically (meaning they are not known to be inherited), familial cases have also been reported.
There is no standard course of treatment for Sotos syndrome. Treatment is symptomatic.
Sotos syndrome is not a life-threatening disorder and patients may have a normal life expectancy. The initial abnormalities of Sotos syndrome usually resolve as the growth rate becomes normal after the first few years of life. Developmental delays may improve in the school-age years, and adults with Sotos syndrome are likely to be within the normal range for intellect and height. However, coordination problems may persist into adulthood.
The NINDS supports and conducts a wide range of studies which focus on identifying and learning more about the genes involved in normal brain development. The knowledge gained from these fundamental studies provides the foundation for understanding how this process can go awry and, thus, may eventually give clues to understanding disorders such as Sotos syndrome.
Sotos syndrome is reported to occur in 1 in 10,000 to 14,000 newborns. Because many of the features of Sotos syndrome can be attributed to other conditions, many cases of this disorder are likely not properly diagnosed, so the true incidence may be closer to 1 in 5,000.
Mutations in the NSD1 gene are the primary cause of Sotos syndrome, accounting for up to 90 percent of cases. Other genetic causes of this condition have not been identified.  The NSD1 gene provides instructions for making a protein that functions as a histone methyltransferase. Histone methyltransferases are enzymes that modify structural proteins called histones, which attach (bind) to DNA and give chromosomes their shape. By adding a molecule called a methyl group to histones (a process called methylation), histone methyltransferases regulate the activity of certain genes and can turn them on and off as needed. The NSD1 protein controls the activity of genes involved in normal growth and development, although most of these genes have not been identified.  Genetic changes involving the NSD1 gene prevent one copy of the gene from producing any functional protein. Research suggests that a reduced amount of NSD1 protein disrupts the normal activity of genes involved in growth and development. However, it remains unclear exactly how a shortage of this protein during development leads to overgrowth, learning disabilities, and the other features of Sotos syndrome.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Sotos syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Sotos Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Sotos' syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Increased Head Circumference   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care