 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar ataxia 40. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Broad-based gait - Dysarthria - Dysdiadochokinesis - Hyperreflexia - Intention tremor - Pontocerebellar atrophy - Spastic paraparesis - Unsteady gait - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar ataxia 20. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal pyramidal signs - Adult onset - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Dysarthria - Dysphonia - Gait ataxia - High pitched voice - Hypermetric saccades - Limb ataxia - Nystagmus - Palatal myoclonus - Postural tremor - Slow progression - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar ataxia 17. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Aggressive behavior - Apraxia - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Bradykinesia - Broad-based gait - Cerebellar atrophy - Chorea - Confusion - Depression - Diffuse cerebral atrophy - Dysarthria - Dysmetria - Dysphagia - Dystonia - Frontal lobe dementia - Frontal release signs - Gait ataxia - Gaze-evoked nystagmus - Gliosis - Hallucinations - Impaired pursuit initiation and maintenance - Intention tremor - Lack of insight - Limb ataxia - Mutism - Myoclonus - Neuronal loss in central nervous system - Paranoia - Parkinsonism - Positive Romberg sign - Progressive - Rigidity - Seizures - Urinary incontinence - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar ataxia 4. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Areflexia - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Babinski sign - Cerebellar atrophy - Distal sensory impairment - Dysarthria - Hyporeflexia - Impaired smooth pursuit - Limb dysmetria - Progressive cerebellar ataxia - Sensory neuropathy - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Spinocerebellar ataxia 13 (SCA13) is a rare sub-type of spinocerebellar ataxias, a group of neurological conditions characterized by degeneration of the brain and spinal cord. Signs and symptoms of SCA13 appear to vary among affected people and range from childhood-onset, slowly progressive gait ataxia and dysarthria (often with intellectual disability and occasional seizures) to adult-onset progressive ataxia. Life expectancy is normal. SCA13 is caused by mutations in the KCNC3 gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Treatment may include anti-seizure medications; assistive devices (such as a canes and walkers); and/or speech therapy and communication devices.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar ataxia 13. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal pyramidal signs - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Cerebellar atrophy - Dysarthria - Gait ataxia - Hyperreflexia - Intellectual disability - Limb ataxia - Limb dysmetria - Morphological abnormality of the pyramidal tract - Motor delay - Muscular hypotonia - Nystagmus - Progressive cerebellar ataxia - Slow progression - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar ataxia 10. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal pyramidal signs - Abnormality of extrapyramidal motor function - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Cerebellar atrophy - Decreased nerve conduction velocity - Dementia - Depression - Dysarthria - Dysdiadochokinesis - Dysmetria - Dysphagia - Gait ataxia - Genetic anticipation - Hyperreflexia - Incomplete penetrance - Incoordination - Limb ataxia - Morphological abnormality of the pyramidal tract - Nystagmus - Progressive cerebellar ataxia - Scanning speech - Seizures - Urinary incontinence - Urinary urgency - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar ataxia 23. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Agenesis of corpus callosum 5% Tremor 5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Babinski sign - Cerebellar atrophy - CNS demyelination - Dysarthria - Dysmetria - Gait ataxia - Hyperreflexia - Impaired vibration sensation in the lower limbs - Limb ataxia - Neuronal loss in central nervous system - Sensorimotor neuropathy - Slow progression - Slow saccadic eye movements - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar ataxia 31. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Late onset 50% Gaze-evoked horizontal nystagmus 33% Sensorineural hearing impairment 7.5% Ataxia - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Cerebellar atrophy - Dysarthria - Gait ataxia - Limb ataxia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar ataxia 14. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Cerebellar atrophy - Depression - Dysarthria - Dysmetria - Dysphagia - Facial myokymia - Focal dystonia - Gait ataxia - Hyperreflexia - Impaired vibration sensation at ankles - Incomplete penetrance - Memory impairment - Mental deterioration - Nystagmus - Progressive cerebellar ataxia - Slow progression - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar ataxia 12. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of eye movement - Action tremor - Anxiety - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Axial dystonia - Cerebellar atrophy - Cerebral cortical atrophy - Delusions - Dementia - Depression - Dysarthria - Dysdiadochokinesis - Dysmetria - Facial myokymia - Head tremor - Hyperreflexia - Parkinsonism - Progressive cerebellar ataxia - Sensorimotor neuropathy - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar ataxia 34. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Dry skin 90% Gait disturbance 90% Hypermelanotic macule 90% Hypohidrosis 90% Incoordination 90% Neurological speech impairment 90% Nystagmus 90% Urticaria 90% Abnormality of the musculature 7.5% Facial asymmetry 7.5% Strabismus 7.5% Fasciculations 5% Intention tremor 5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Cerebellar atrophy - Dysarthria - Dysdiadochokinesis - Gait ataxia - Hyperkeratosis - Hyporeflexia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar ataxia 21. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Nystagmus 5% Aggressive behavior - Akinesia - Apathy - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Cerebellar atrophy - Cognitive impairment - Cogwheel rigidity - Dysarthria - Dysgraphia - Gait ataxia - Hyporeflexia - Impulsivity - Intellectual disability - Limb ataxia - Microsaccadic pursuit - Parkinsonism - Postural tremor - Progressive cerebellar ataxia - Scanning speech - Slow progression - Slow saccadic eye movements - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar ataxia X-linked type 3. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Cognitive impairment 90% Incoordination 90% Muscular hypotonia 90% Optic atrophy 90% Sensorineural hearing impairment 90% Areflexia - Cerebellar atrophy - Death in infancy - Dementia - Dysmetria - Dysphagia - Episodic hypoventilation - Episodic respiratory distress - Esotropia - Gastroesophageal reflux - Gliosis - Head titubation - Hyporeflexia - Infantile onset - Intention tremor - Lethargy - Muscle weakness - Neuronal loss in central nervous system - Optic disc pallor - Recurrent respiratory infections - Seizures - Spasticity - Unilateral vocal cord paralysis - Vomiting - X-linked recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Spinocerebellar ataxia 15 (SCA15) is a neurological condition characterized by slowly progressive gait and limb ataxia, often in combination with eye movement abnormalities and  balance, speech and swallowing difficulties. The onset of symptoms typically occurs between ages 7 and 66 years. The ability to walk independently is often maintained for many years following onset of symptoms. SCA15 is caused by mutations in the ITPR1 gene. It is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Diagnosis is based on clinical history, physical examination, molecular genetic testing, and exclusion of other similar diseases. There is no effective treatment known to modify disease progression. Patients may benefit from occupational and physical therapy for gait dysfunction and speech therapy for dysarthria.
 Spinocerebellar ataxia 15 (SCA15) is characterized by slowly progressive gait and limb ataxia, often in combination with ataxic dysarthria, titubation, upper limb postural tremor (which occurs when a person tries to maintain a position against gravity, such as holding the arms outstretched), mild hyperreflexia (exaggerated reflexes), gaze-evoked nystagmus, and impaired vestibulo-ocular reflex gain (an inability to stabilize the eyes during small head tremors, which makes it difficult to read, etc.). Mild dysphagia and movement-induced oscillopsia (a bouncing and blurring of vision) have been observed in some patients. Symptoms typically present between the ages of 7 and 66 years. Gait ataxia and tremor are often the first noticeable symptoms. The ability to walk independently may be maintained for many years (or even decades) following onset of symptoms. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar ataxia 15. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Adult onset - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Cerebellar atrophy - Dysarthria - Dysmetric saccades - Gait ataxia - Gaze-evoked horizontal nystagmus - Hyperreflexia - Impaired smooth pursuit - Juvenile onset - Limb ataxia - Postural tremor - Scanning speech - Slow progression - Truncal ataxia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar ataxia 28. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Dystonia 5% Parkinsonism 5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Babinski sign - Cerebellar atrophy - Dysarthria - Dysmetric saccades - Gait ataxia - Gaze-evoked nystagmus - Limb ataxia - Lower limb hyperreflexia - Ophthalmoparesis - Ptosis - Slow progression - Slow saccadic eye movements - Spasticity - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Spinocerebellar ataxia 2 (SCA2) is a progressive disorder that causes symptoms including uncoordinated movement (ataxia), speech and swallowing difficulties, muscle wasting, slow eye movement, and sometimes dementia. Signs and symptoms usually begin in mid-adulthood but can appear any time from childhood to late-adulthood. SCA2 is caused by mutations in the ATXN2 gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.
 Early symptoms of spinocerebellar ataxia may include uncoordinated movement (ataxia) and leg cramps. Other symptoms may include tremor; decreased muscle tone; poor tendon reflexes; abnormal eye movements; dementia; dystonia and/or chorea; muscle twitches; nerve irritation and swelling (polyneuropathy); leg weakness; difficulty swallowing; bladder dysfunction; and parkinsonism. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar ataxia 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Bradykinesia - Dementia - Dilated fourth ventricle - Distal amyotrophy - Dysarthria - Dysdiadochokinesis - Dysmetria - Dysmetric saccades - Dysphagia - Fasciculations - Gaze-evoked nystagmus - Genetic anticipation - Hyporeflexia - Impaired horizontal smooth pursuit - Limb ataxia - Muscular hypotonia - Myoclonus - Oculomotor apraxia - Olivopontocerebellar atrophy - Ophthalmoplegia - Postural instability - Postural tremor - Progressive cerebellar ataxia - Rigidity - Rod-cone dystrophy - Slow saccadic eye movements - Spasticity - Spinocerebellar tract degeneration - Urinary bladder sphincter dysfunction - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
How  Spinocerebellar ataxia 2 (SCA2) is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that having one changed (mutated) copy of ATXN2 (the responsible gene) in each cell is enough to cause signs and symptoms of the condition. The ATXN2 gene mutations that cause SCA2 involve a DNA sequence called a 'CAG trinucleotide repeat.' It is made up of a series of three DNA building blocks (CAG stands for cytosine, adenine, and guanine) that appear multiple times in a row. The CAG sequence is normally repeated about 22 times in the gene, but it can be repeated up to 31 times without causing health problems. SCA2 develops in people who have 32 or more CAG repeats in the ATXN2 gene. In most cases, an affected person inherits the mutated gene (with too many repeats) from an affected parent. However, in some cases, an affected person does not have an affected parent. People with an increased number of CAG repeats who don't develop SCA2 are still at risk of having children who will develop the disorder. This is because as the gene is passed down from parent to child, the number of CAG repeats often increases. In general, the more repeats a person has, the earlier symptoms begin. This phenomenon is called anticipation. People with 32 or 33 repeats tend to develop symptoms in late adulthood, while people with more than 45 repeats often have symptoms by their teens.  For some reason, the number of repeats tend to increase more when the gene is inherited from a person's father than when inherited from a person's mother. Each child of an affected person has a 50% chance of inheriting the CAG repeat expansion.
 Yes. Molecular genetic testing (analysis of DNA) is needed for a diagnosis of spinocerebellar ataxia 2 (SCA2). This testing detects abnormal CAG trinucleotide repeat expansions in the ATXN2 gene. Affected people (or people who will later develop symptoms of SCA2) have a copy of the ATXN2 gene that has 33 or more CAG repeats. This testing detects nearly 100% of cases of SCA2. The Genetic Testing Registry (GTR) provides information about the labs that offer genetic testing for SCA2. The intended audience for the GTR is health care providers and researchers. Therefore, patients and consumers with specific questions about a genetic test should contact a health care provider or a genetics professional.
 Treatment of spinocerebellar ataxia 2 (SCA2) is supportive and aims to help the affected person maintain their independence and avoid injury. It is recommended that people with SCA2 remain physically active, maintain a healthy weight, use adaptive equipment as needed, and avoid alcohol and medications that affect cerebellar function. Adaptive equipment may include canes or other devices to help with walking and mobility. People with SCA2 may develop difficulty speaking and may need to use computerized devices or writing pads to help with communication. Levodopa may be prescribed to help with some of the movement problems (e.g., rigidity and tremor), and magnesium may improve muscle cramping.
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 11 (SCA11) is characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia (difficulty walking and balance) and abnormal eye signs (jerky pursuit, horizontal and vertical movements (nystagmus), pyramidal features (increased muscular tonus, increased reflexes and an abnormal reflex known as Babinski sign and inability to make to perform fine movements), peripheral neuropathy with numbness, weakness or pain in the feet or hands or other places of the body and dystonia. It is a very rare disease and very few patients have been reported to date. In them, age of onset ranged from the early teens to the second decade of life and life span was normal. Diagnosis is based on signs and symptoms and with a genetic exam showing an alteration (mutation) in the TTBK2 gene. It is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Treatment may include speech and language therapy for talking and swallowing problems, occupational therapy, including home adaptations, physiotherapy and use of assistive walking devices and ankle-foot orthotics (AFOs) for those with neuropathy.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar ataxia 11. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Adult onset - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Cerebellar atrophy - Dysarthria - Hyperreflexia - Nystagmus - Progressive cerebellar ataxia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Spinocerebellar ataxia 3 is a rare movement disorder that is characterized by ataxia, clumsiness and weakness in the arms and legs, spasticity, a staggering lurching walk easily mistaken for drunkenness, difficulty with speech and swallowing, and involuntary eye movements sometimes accompanied by double vision, and bulging eyes. Some patients have dystonia or symptoms similar to those of Parkinson's disease. Others have twitching of the face or tongue, neuropathy, or problems with urination and the autonomic nervous system. Symptoms can begin any time between childhood and about 70 years of age. Spinocerebellar ataxia 3 is a progressive disease, meaning that symptoms get worse with time. Life expectancy ranges from the mid-thirties for those with severe forms of the disorder to a normal life expectancy for those with mild forms. Spinocerebellar ataxia is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern and is caused by a trinucleotide repeat expansion in the ataxin-3 gene (ATXN3).
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinocerebellar ataxia 3. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Dysautonomia 7.5% Ataxia 57/57 Gaze-evoked nystagmus 15/20 External ophthalmoplegia 34/57 Dysarthria 30/57 Spasticity 62/139 Dystonia 17/57 Fasciculations 12/57 Parkinsonism 3/57 Absent Achilles reflex - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Babinski sign - Bradykinesia - Cerebellar atrophy - Chronic pain - Dementia - Dilated fourth ventricle - Diplopia - Distal amyotrophy - Dysmetric saccades - Dysphagia - Facial-lingual fasciculations - Genetic anticipation - Gliosis - Impaired horizontal smooth pursuit - Limb ataxia - Muscle cramps - Postural instability - Progressive - Progressive cerebellar ataxia - Proptosis - Ptosis - Rigidity - Spinocerebellar tract degeneration - Supranuclear ophthalmoplegia - Truncal ataxia - Urinary bladder sphincter dysfunction - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Infantile-onset spinocerebellar ataxia (IOSCA) is a progressive disorder that affects the nervous system. Babies with IOSCA develop normally during the first year of life. During early childhood, however, they begin experiencing difficulty coordinating movements (ataxia); very weak muscle tone (hypotonia); involuntary writhing movements of the limbs (athetosis); and decreased reflexes. By their teenage years affected individuals require wheelchair assistance.  People with IOSCA often develop problems with the autonomic nervous system, which controls involuntary body functions. As a result, they may experience excessive sweating, difficulty controlling urination, and severe constipation.  IOSCA also leads to vision and hearing problems that begin by about age 7. Children with this disorder develop weakness in the muscles that control eye movement (ophthalmoplegia). In their teenage years they experience degeneration of the nerves that carry information from the eyes to the brain (optic atrophy), which can result in vision loss. Hearing loss caused by nerve damage (sensorineural hearing loss) typically occurs during childhood and progresses to profound deafness.  Individuals with IOSCA may have recurrent seizures (epilepsy). These seizures can lead to severe brain dysfunction (encephalopathy).  Most people with IOSCA survive into adulthood. However, a few individuals with IOSCA have an especially severe form of the disorder involving liver damage and encephalopathy that develops during early childhood. These children do not generally live past age 5.
More than 20 individuals with IOSCA have been identified in Finland. A few individuals with similar symptoms have been reported elsewhere in Europe.
Mutations in the C10orf2 gene cause IOSCA. The C10orf2 gene provides instructions for making two very similar proteins called Twinkle and Twinky. These proteins are found in the mitochondria, which are structures within cells that convert the energy from food into a form that cells can use.  Mitochondria each contain a small amount of DNA, known as mitochondrial DNA or mtDNA, which is essential for the normal function of these structures. The Twinkle protein is involved in the production and maintenance of mtDNA. The function of the Twinky protein is unknown.  The C10orf2 gene mutations that cause IOSCA interfere with the function of the Twinkle protein and result in reduced quantities of mtDNA (mtDNA depletion). Impaired mitochondrial function in the nervous system, muscles, and other tissues that require a large amount of energy leads to neurological dysfunction and the other problems associated with IOSCA.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of IOSCA:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Infantile-Onset Spinocerebellar Ataxia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome 7 (hepatocerebral type)   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) is a condition characterized by progressive problems with movement. People with this condition initially experience problems with coordination and balance (ataxia). Other signs and symptoms of SCA1 include speech and swallowing difficulties, muscle stiffness (spasticity), and weakness in the muscles that control eye movement (ophthalmoplegia). Eye muscle weakness leads to rapid, involuntary eye movements (nystagmus). Individuals with SCA1 may have difficulty processing, learning, and remembering information (cognitive impairment).  Over time, individuals with SCA1 may develop numbness, tingling, or pain in the arms and legs (sensory neuropathy); uncontrolled muscle tensing (dystonia); muscle wasting (atrophy); and muscle twitches (fasciculations). Rarely, rigidity, tremors, and involuntary jerking movements (chorea) have been reported in people who have been affected for many years.  Signs and symptoms of the disorder typically begin in early adulthood but can appear anytime from childhood to late adulthood. People with SCA1 typically survive 10 to 20 years after symptoms first appear.
SCA1 affects 1 to 2 per 100,000 people worldwide.
Mutations in the ATXN1 gene cause SCA1. The ATXN1 gene provides instructions for making a protein called ataxin-1. This protein is found throughout the body, but its function is unknown. Within cells, ataxin-1 is located in the nucleus. Researchers believe that ataxin-1 may be involved in regulating various aspects of producing proteins, including the first stage of protein production (transcription) and processing RNA, a chemical cousin of DNA.  The ATXN1 gene mutations that cause SCA1 involve a DNA segment known as a CAG trinucleotide repeat. This segment is made up of a series of three DNA building blocks (cytosine, adenine, and guanine) that appear multiple times in a row. Normally, the CAG segment is repeated 4 to 39 times within the gene. In people with SCA1, the CAG segment is repeated 40 to more than 80 times. People with 40 to 50 repeats tend to first experience signs and symptoms of SCA1 in mid-adulthood, while people with more than 70 repeats usually have signs and symptoms by their teens.  An increase in the length of the CAG segment leads to the production of an abnormally long version of the ataxin-1 protein that folds into the wrong 3-dimensional shape. This abnormal protein clusters with other proteins to form clumps (aggregates) within the nucleus of the cells. These aggregates prevent the ataxin-1 protein from functioning normally, which damages cells and leads to cell death. For reasons that are unclear, aggregates of ataxin-1 are found only in the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system). Cells within the cerebellum, which is the part of the brain that coordinates movement, are particularly sensitive to changes in ataxin-1 shape and function. Over time, the loss of the cells of the cerebellum causes the movement problems characteristic of SCA1.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. An affected person usually inherits the altered gene from one affected parent. However, some people with SCA1 do not have a parent with the disorder.  As the altered ATXN1 gene is passed down from one generation to the next, the length of the CAG trinucleotide repeat often increases. A larger number of repeats is usually associated with an earlier onset of signs and symptoms. This phenomenon is called anticipation. Anticipation tends to be more prominent when the ATXN1 gene is inherited from a person's father (paternal inheritance) than when it is inherited from a person's mother (maternal inheritance).  Individuals who have around 35 CAG repeats in the ATXN1 gene do not develop SCA1, but they are at risk of having children who will develop the disorder. As the gene is passed from parent to child, the size of the CAG trinucleotide repeat may lengthen into the range associated with SCA1 (40 repeats or more).
These resources address the diagnosis or management of SCA1:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Spinocerebellar ataxia 1   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (SCA6) is a condition characterized by progressive problems with movement. People with this condition initially experience problems with coordination and balance (ataxia). Other early signs and symptoms of SCA6 include speech difficulties, involuntary eye movements (nystagmus), and double vision. Over time, individuals with SCA6 may develop loss of coordination in their arms, tremors, and uncontrolled muscle tensing (dystonia).  Signs and symptoms of SCA6 typically begin in a person's forties or fifties but can appear anytime from childhood to late adulthood. Most people with this disorder require wheelchair assistance by the time they are in their sixties.
The worldwide prevalence of SCA6 is estimated to be less than 1 in 100,000 individuals.
Mutations in the CACNA1A gene cause SCA6. The CACNA1A gene provides instructions for making a protein that forms a part of some calcium channels. These channels transport positively charged calcium atoms (calcium ions) across cell membranes. The movement of these ions is critical for normal signaling between nerve cells (neurons) in the brain and other parts of the nervous system. The CACNA1A gene provides instructions for making one part (the alpha-1 subunit) of a calcium channel called CaV2.1. CaV2.1 channels play an essential role in communication between neurons in the brain.  The CACNA1A gene mutations that cause SCA6 involve a DNA segment known as a CAG trinucleotide repeat. This segment is made up of a series of three DNA building blocks (cytosine, adenine, and guanine) that appear multiple times in a row. Normally, the CAG segment is repeated 4 to 18 times within the gene. In people with SCA6, the CAG segment is repeated 20 to 33 times. People with 20 repeats tend to experience signs and symptoms of SCA6 beginning in late adulthood, while people with a larger number of repeats usually have signs and symptoms from mid-adulthood.  An increase in the length of the CAG segment leads to the production of an abnormally long version of the alpha-1 subunit. This version of the subunit alters the location and function of the CaV2.1 channels. Normally the alpha-1 subunit is located within the cell membrane; the abnormal subunit is found in the cell membrane as well as in the fluid inside cells (cytoplasm), where it clusters together and forms clumps (aggregates). The effect these aggregates have on cell functioning is unknown. The lack of normal calcium channels in the cell membrane impairs cell communication between neurons in the brain. Diminished cell communication leads to cell death. Cells within the cerebellum, which is the part of the brain that coordinates movement, are particularly sensitive to the accumulation of these aggregates. Over time, a loss of cells in the cerebellum causes the movement problems characteristic of SCA6.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  In most cases, an affected person has one parent with the condition.  As the altered CACNA1A gene is passed down from one generation to the next, the length of the CAG trinucleotide repeat often slightly increases. A larger number of repeats is usually associated with an earlier onset of signs and symptoms. This phenomenon is called anticipation.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of SCA6:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 6  - Genetic Testing Registry: Spinocerebellar ataxia 6   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 36 (SCA36) is a condition characterized by progressive problems with movement that typically begin in mid-adulthood. People with this condition initially experience problems with coordination and balance (ataxia). Affected individuals often have exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia) and problems with speech (dysarthria). They also usually develop muscle twitches (fasciculations) of the tongue and over time, the muscles in the tongue waste away (atrophy). These tongue problems can cause difficulties swallowing liquids. As the condition progresses, individuals with SCA36 develop muscle atrophy in the legs, forearms, and hands. Another common feature of SCA36 is the atrophy of specialized nerve cells that control muscle movement (motor neurons), which can contribute to the tongue and limb muscle atrophy in affected individuals.  Some people with SCA36 have abnormalities of the eye muscles, which can lead to involuntary eye movements (nystagmus), rapid eye movements (saccades), trouble moving the eyes side-to-side (oculomotor apraxia), and droopy eyelids (ptosis). Sensorineural hearing loss, which is hearing loss caused by changes in the inner ear, may also occur in people with SCA36.  Brain imaging of people with SCA36 shows progressive atrophy of various parts of the brain, particularly within the cerebellum, which is the area of the brain involved in coordinating movements. Over time, the loss of cells in the cerebellum causes the movement problems characteristic of SCA36. In older affected individuals, the frontal lobes of the brain may show atrophy resulting in loss of executive function, which is the ability to plan and implement actions and develop problem-solving strategies.  Signs and symptoms of SCA36 typically begin in a person's forties or fifties but can appear anytime during adulthood. People with SCA36 have a normal lifespan and are usually mobile for 15 to 20 years after they are diagnosed.
Approximately 100 individuals with SCA36 have been reported in the scientific literature. Almost all of these individuals have been from two regions: western Japan and the Costa de Morte in Galicia, Spain.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  In most cases, an affected person has one parent with the condition.  In conditions that are caused by repeated segments of DNA, the number of repeats often increases when the altered gene is passed down from one generation to the next. Additionally, a larger number of repeats is usually associated with an earlier onset of signs and symptoms. This phenomenon is called anticipation. Some families affected by SCA36 have demonstrated anticipation while others have not. When anticipation is observed in SCA36, the mutation is most often passed down from the affected father.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of spinocerebellar ataxia type 36:  - Ataxia Center at the University of Minnesota: Dominant Spinocerebellar Ataxias  - Baylor College of Medicine: Parkinson's Disease Center and Movement Disorders Clinic: Ataxia  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 36  - Genetic Testing Registry: Spinocerebellar ataxia 36  - Johns Hopkins Medicine: Ataxia  - The Ataxia Center at the University of Chicago: Autosomal Dominant Spinocerebellar Ataxia   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2) is a condition characterized by progressive problems with movement. People with this condition initially experience problems with coordination and balance (ataxia). Other early signs and symptoms of SCA2 include speech and swallowing difficulties, rigidity, tremors, and weakness in the muscles that control eye movement (ophthalmoplegia). Eye muscle weakness leads to a decreased ability to make rapid eye movements (saccadic slowing).  Over time, individuals with SCA2 may develop loss of sensation and weakness in the limbs (peripheral neuropathy), muscle wasting (atrophy), uncontrolled muscle tensing (dystonia), and involuntary jerking movements (chorea). Individuals with SCA2 may have problems with short term memory, planning, and problem solving, or experience an overall decline in intellectual function (dementia).  Signs and symptoms of the disorder typically begin in mid-adulthood but can appear anytime from childhood to late adulthood. People with SCA2 usually survive 10 to 20 years after symptoms first appear.
The prevalence of SCA2 is unknown. This condition is estimated to be one of the most common types of spinocerebellar ataxia; however, all types of spinocerebellar ataxia are relatively rare. SCA2 is more common in Cuba, particularly in the Holgun province, where approximately 40 per 100,000 individuals are affected.
Mutations in the ATXN2 gene cause SCA2. The ATXN2 gene provides instructions for making a protein called ataxin-2. This protein is found throughout the body, but its function is unknown. Ataxin-2 is found in the fluid inside cells (cytoplasm), where it appears to interact with a cell structure called the endoplasmic reticulum. The endoplasmic reticulum is involved in protein production, processing, and transport. Researchers believe that ataxin-2 may be involved in processing RNA, a chemical cousin of DNA. Ataxin-2 is also thought to play a role in the production of proteins from RNA (translation of DNA's genetic information).  The ATXN2 gene mutations that cause SCA2 involve a DNA segment known as a CAG trinucleotide repeat. This segment is made up of a series of three DNA building blocks (cytosine, adenine, and guanine) that appear multiple times in a row. Normally, the CAG segment is repeated approximately 22 times within the gene, but it can be repeated up to 31 times without causing any health problems. Individuals with 32 or more CAG repeats in the ATXN2 gene develop SCA2. People with 32 or 33 repeats tend to first experience signs and symptoms of SCA2 in late adulthood, while people with more than 45 repeats usually have signs and symptoms by their teens.  It is unclear how the abnormally long CAG segment affects the function of the ataxin-2 protein. The abnormal protein apparently leads to cell death, as people with SCA2 show loss of brain cells in different parts of the brain. Over time, the loss of brain cells causes the movement problems characteristic of SCA2.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. An affected person usually inherits the altered gene from one affected parent. However, some people with SCA2 do not have a parent with the disorder. Individuals who have an increase in the number of CAG repeats in the ATXN2 gene, but do not develop SCA2, are at risk of having children who will develop the disorder.  As the altered ATXN2 gene is passed down from one generation to the next, the length of the CAG trinucleotide repeat often increases. A larger number of repeats is usually associated with an earlier onset of signs and symptoms. This phenomenon is called anticipation. Anticipation tends to be more prominent when the ATXN2 gene is inherited from a person's father (paternal inheritance) than when it is inherited from a person's mother (maternal inheritance).
These resources address the diagnosis or management of SCA2:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Spinocerebellar ataxia 2   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3) is a condition characterized by progressive problems with movement. People with this condition initially experience problems with coordination and balance (ataxia). Other early signs and symptoms of SCA3 include speech difficulties, uncontrolled muscle tensing (dystonia), muscle stiffness (spasticity), rigidity, tremors, bulging eyes, and double vision. People with this condition may experience sleep disorders such as restless leg syndrome or REM sleep behavior disorder. Restless leg syndrome is a condition characterized by numbness or tingling in the legs accompanied by an urge to move the legs to stop the sensations. REM sleep behavior disorder is a condition in which the muscles are active during the dream (REM) stage of sleep, so an affected person often acts out his or her dreams. These sleep disorders tend to leave affected individuals feeling tired during the day.  Over time, individuals with SCA3 may develop loss of sensation and weakness in the limbs (peripheral neuropathy), muscle cramps, muscle twitches (fasciculations), and swallowing difficulties. Individuals with SCA3 may have problems with memory, planning, and problem solving.  Signs and symptoms of the disorder typically begin in mid-adulthood but can appear anytime from childhood to late adulthood. People with SCA3 eventually require wheelchair assistance. They usually survive 10 to 20 years after symptoms first appear.
The prevalence of SCA3 is unknown. This condition is thought to be the most common type of spinocerebellar ataxia; however, all types of spinocerebellar ataxia are relatively rare.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person has one parent with the condition.  As the altered ATXN3 gene is passed down from one generation to the next, the length of the CAG trinucleotide repeat often increases. A larger number of repeats is usually associated with an earlier onset of signs and symptoms. This phenomenon is called anticipation. Anticipation tends to be more prominent when the ATXN3 gene is inherited from a person's father (paternal inheritance) than when it is inherited from a person's mother (maternal inheritance).  In rare cases, individuals have been reported with expanded CAG repeats on both copies of the ATXN3 gene in each cell. These people have more severe signs and symptoms than people with only one mutation, and features of the condition appear in childhood.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of SCA3:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 3  - Genetic Testing Registry: Azorean disease   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care