Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a genetic disease that attacks nerve cells, called motor neurons, in the spinal cord. These cells communicate with your voluntary muscles - the ones you can control, like in your arms and legs. As the neurons die, the muscles weaken. This can affect walking, crawling, breathing, swallowing, and head and neck control.    SMA runs in families. Parents usually have no symptoms, but still carry the gene. Genetic counseling is important if the disease runs in your family.    There are many types of SMA. Some of them are fatal. Some people have a normal life expectancy. It depends on the type and how it affects breathing. There is no cure. Treatments help with symptoms and prevent complications. They may include machines to help with breathing, nutritional support, physical therapy, and medicines.    NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinal muscular atrophy Ryukyuan type. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Fasciculations - Infantile onset - Kyphoscoliosis - Pes cavus - Proximal amyotrophy - Spinal muscular atrophy - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spinal muscular atrophy type 3. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Areflexia of lower limbs - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Degeneration of anterior horn cells - EMG abnormality - Hand tremor - Hyporeflexia - Limb fasciculations - Muscle cramps - Muscle weakness - Progressive - Spinal muscular atrophy - Tongue fasciculations - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
There is no cure for SMA. Treatment consists of managing the symptoms and preventing complications.
The prognosis is poor for babies with SMA Type I. Most die within the first two years. For children with SMA Type II, the prognosis for life expectancy or for independent standing or walking roughly correlates with how old they are when they first begin to experience symptoms - older children tend to have less severe symptoms Life expectancy is reduced but some individuals live into adolescence or young adulthood. Individuals with SMA type III may be prone to respiratory infections but with care may have a normal lifespan.
Spinal muscular atrophy affects 1 in 6,000 to 1 in 10,000 people.
Types I, II, III, and IV spinal muscular atrophy are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the SMN1 gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Extra copies of the SMN2 gene are due to a random error when making new copies of DNA (replication) in an egg or sperm cell or just after fertilization.  SMA-LED and the late-onset form of spinal muscular atrophy caused by VAPB gene mutations are inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  X-linked spinal muscular atrophy is inherited in an X-linked pattern. The UBA1 gene is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, males are affected by X-linked disorders much more frequently than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of spinal muscular atrophy:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Spinal Muscular Atrophy  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Spinal Muscular Atrophy, X-Linked Infantile  - Genetic Testing Registry: Adult proximal spinal muscular atrophy, autosomal dominant  - Genetic Testing Registry: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita, distal, X-linked  - Genetic Testing Registry: Kugelberg-Welander disease  - Genetic Testing Registry: Spinal muscular atrophy type 4  - Genetic Testing Registry: Spinal muscular atrophy, lower extremity predominant 1, autosomal dominant  - Genetic Testing Registry: Spinal muscular atrophy, type II  - Genetic Testing Registry: Werdnig-Hoffmann disease  - Genomics Education Programme (UK)  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Spinal Muscular Atrophy   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy, also known as Kennedy disease, is a disorder of specialized nerve cells that control muscle movement (motor neurons). These nerve cells originate in the spinal cord and the part of the brain that is connected to the spinal cord (the brainstem).  Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy mainly affects males and is characterized by muscle weakness and wasting (atrophy) that usually begins in adulthood and worsens slowly over time. Muscle wasting in the arms and legs results in cramping; leg muscle weakness can also lead to difficulty walking and a tendency to fall. Certain muscles in the face and throat (bulbar muscles) are also affected, which causes progressive problems with swallowing and speech. Additionally, muscle twitches (fasciculations) are common. Some males with the disorder experience unusual breast development (gynecomastia) and may be unable to father a child (infertile).
This condition affects fewer than 1 in 150,000 males and is very rare in females.
Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy results from a particular type of mutation in the AR gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called an androgen receptor. This receptor attaches (binds) to a class of hormones called androgens, which are involved in male sexual development. Androgens and androgen receptors also have other important functions in both males and females, such as regulating hair growth and sex drive.  The AR gene mutation that causes spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy is the abnormal expansion of a DNA segment called a CAG triplet repeat. Normally, this DNA segment is repeated up to about 36 times. In people with spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy, the CAG segment is repeated at least 38 times, and it may be two or three times its usual length. Although the extended CAG region changes the structure of the androgen receptor, it is unclear how the altered protein disrupts nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord. Researchers believe that a fragment of the androgen receptor protein containing the CAG segment accumulates within these cells and interferes with normal cell functions. The nerve cells gradually die, leading to the muscle weakness and wasting seen in this condition. People with a higher number of CAG repeats tend to develop signs and symptoms of spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy at an earlier age.
This condition is inherited in an X-linked pattern. A condition is considered X-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), a mutation in the only copy of the gene in each cell causes the disorder. In most cases, males experience more severe symptoms of the disorder than females (who have two X chromosomes). Females with a mutation in one copy of the AR gene in each cell are typically unaffected. A few females with mutations in both copies of the gene have had mild features related to the condition, including muscle cramps and occasional tremors. Researchers believe that the milder signs and symptoms in females may be related to lower androgen levels.  A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Spinal and Bulbar Muscular Atrophy  - Genetic Testing Registry: Bulbo-spinal atrophy X-linked  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Muscle Atrophy   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care