Ankylosing spondylitis is a type of arthritis of the spine. It causes inflammation between your vertebrae, which are the bones that make up your spine, and in the joints between your spine and pelvis. In some people, it can affect other joints.    AS is more common and more severe in men. It often runs in families. The cause is unknown, but it is likely that both genes and factors in the environment play a role.    Early symptoms of AS include back pain and stiffness. These problems often start in late adolescence or early adulthood. Over time, AS can fuse your vertebrae together, limiting movement. Some people have symptoms that come and go. Others have severe, ongoing pain.    A diagnosis of AS is based on your medical history and a physical examination. You may also have imaging or blood tests.    AS has no cure, but medicines can relieve symptoms and may keep the disease from getting worse. Eating a healthy diet, not smoking, and exercising can also help. In rare cases, you may need surgery to straighten the spine.    NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Disease
Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) is a type of chronic, inflammatory arthritis that mainly affects the spine. It usually begins with inflammation of the joints between the pelvic bones and spine, gradually spreading to the joints between the vertebrae. Signs and symptoms usually begin in adolescence or early adulthood and may include back pain and stiffness. Back movement gradually becomes more limited as the vertebrae fuse together. The condition may also affect the shoulders; ribs; hips; knees; and feet; as well as the eyes; bowel; and very rarely, the heart and lungs. AS is likely caused by a combination of genetic and environmental factors; variations in several genes are thought to affect the risk to develop AS. In most cases, treatment involves exercise and medications to relieve pain and inflammation.
 Although ankylosing spondylitis (AS) can affect more than one person in a family, it is not a purely genetic disease. While genes seem to play a role, the exact cause of AS is not known. It is considered to be multifactorial, which means that multiple genetic and environmental factors likely interact to affect a person's risk to develop AS. Most of these factors have not been identified. Inheriting a genetic variation that has been associated with AS does not mean a person will develop AS. Currently, it is not possible to predict the exact likelihood that the children of an affected person will develop the disease. You can find more information about the genetics of AS from Genetics Home Reference, the U.S National Library of Medicine's Web site for consumer information about genetic conditions and the genes or chromosomes related to those conditions.
 The main goal of treatment for people with ankylosing spondylitis (AS) is to maximize long-term quality of life. This may involve easing symptoms of pain and stiffness; retaining function; preventing complications (such as contractures); and minimizing the effects of associated conditions. Education, exercise, and medications are all very important in managing AS. An exercise program is recommended for all affected people, and some may need individual physical therapy. Affected people are encouraged to speak with their health care provider before instituting any changes to an exercise regime. Video demonstrations of exercises tailored for ankylosing spondylitis are available for viewing through the National Ankylosing Spondylitis Society in the UK. Medications may include nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs); pain relievers; sulfasalazine; and anti-tumor necrosis factor drugs. Steroid injections may be helpful for some people. Most people don't need surgery, but it may be indicated when there is severe, persistent pain or severe limitation in mobility and quality of life. Smoking creates additional problems for people with AS, so affected people who smoke should quit. More detailed information about the treatment of ankylosing spondylitis is available on Medscape's Web site. You may need to register to view the article, but registration is free.
Ankylosing spondylitis is a form of ongoing joint inflammation (chronic inflammatory arthritis) that primarily affects the spine. This condition is characterized by back pain and stiffness that typically appear in adolescence or early adulthood. Over time, back movement gradually becomes limited as the bones of the spine (vertebrae) fuse together. This progressive bony fusion is called ankylosis.  The earliest symptoms of ankylosing spondylitis result from inflammation of the joints between the pelvic bones (the ilia) and the base of the spine (the sacrum). These joints are called sacroiliac joints, and inflammation of these joints is known as sacroiliitis. The inflammation gradually spreads to the joints between the vertebrae, causing a condition called spondylitis. Ankylosing spondylitis can involve other joints as well, including the shoulders, hips, and, less often, the knees. As the disease progresses, it can affect the joints between the spine and ribs, restricting movement of the chest and making it difficult to breathe deeply. People with advanced disease are also more prone to fractures of the vertebrae.  Ankylosing spondylitis affects the eyes in up to 40 percent of cases, leading to episodes of eye inflammation called acute iritis. Acute iritis causes eye pain and increased sensitivity to light (photophobia). Rarely, ankylosing spondylitis can also cause serious complications involving the heart, lungs, and nervous system.
Ankylosing spondylitis is part of a group of related diseases known as spondyloarthropathies. In the United States, spondyloarthropathies affect 3.5 to 13 per 1,000 people.
Ankylosing spondylitis is likely caused by a combination of genetic and environmental factors, most of which have not been identified. However, researchers have found variations in several genes that influence the risk of developing this disorder.  The HLA-B gene provides instructions for making a protein that plays an important role in the immune system. The HLA-B gene is part of a family of genes called the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) complex. The HLA complex helps the immune system distinguish the body's own proteins from proteins made by foreign invaders (such as viruses and bacteria). The HLA-B gene has many different normal variations, allowing each person's immune system to react to a wide range of foreign proteins. A variation of the HLA-B gene called HLA-B27 increases the risk of developing ankylosing spondylitis. Although many people with ankylosing spondylitis have the HLA-B27 variation, most people with this version of the HLA-B gene never develop the disorder. It is not known how HLA-B27 increases the risk of developing ankylosing spondylitis.  Variations in several additional genes, including ERAP1, IL1A, and IL23R, have also been associated with ankylosing spondylitis. Although these genes play critical roles in the immune system, it is unclear how variations in these genes affect a person's risk of developing ankylosing spondylitis. Changes in genes that have not yet been identified are also believed to affect the chances of developing ankylosing spondylitis and influence the progression of the disorder. Some of these genes likely play a role in the immune system, while others may have different functions. Researchers are working to identify these genes and clarify their role in ankylosing spondylitis.
Although ankylosing spondylitis can occur in more than one person in a family, it is not a purely genetic disease. Multiple genetic and environmental factors likely play a part in determining the risk of developing this disorder. As a result, inheriting a genetic variation linked with ankylosing spondylitis does not mean that a person will develop the condition, even in families in which more than one family member has the disorder. For example, about 80 percent of children who inherit HLA-B27 from a parent with ankylosing spondylitis do not develop the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of ankylosing spondylitis:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Ankylosing spondylitis  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Ankylosing Spondylitis  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: HLA-B27 Antigen   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care