Cancers that are known collectively as head and neck cancers usually begin in the squamous cells that line the moist, mucosal surfaces inside the head and neck (for example, inside the mouth, the nose, and the throat). These squamous cell cancers are often referred to as squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck. At least 75 % of head and neck cancers are caused by tobacco and alcohol use. Infection with cancer-causing types of human papillomavirus (HPV), especially HPV-16, is a risk factor for some types of head and neck cancers. The symptoms of head and neck cancers may include a lump or a sore that does not heal, a sore throat that does not go away, difficulty in swallowing, and a change or hoarseness in the voice. Treatment for head and neck cancer can include surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, targeted therapy, or a combination of treatments.
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the second most common skin cancer. SCC most often affects individuals who are exposed to large amounts of sunlight. It is typically characterized by a red papule or plaque with a scaly or crusted surface; it may be suspected whenever a small, firm reddish-colored skin lesion, growth or bump appears on the skin, but it may also be a flat growth with a curly and crusted surface. Most often these growths are located on the face, ears, neck, hands and/or arms, but they may occur on the lips, mouth, tongue, genitalia or other area. The most common causes of SCC are radiation from the sun and arsenic exposure. With appropriate treatment, it is usually curable.
 Skin cancer generally has a high cure rate if it is treated early. Treatment depends on how big the tumor is, its location, and how far it has spread (metastasis). Methods of treatment for squamous cell carcinoma may include: Curettage and desiccation - scraping away the cancer and using electricity to kill any remaining cancer cells; this is used to treat cancers that are not very large or deep Surgical excision - cutting out of the tumor and stitching up the remaining tissue Radiation therapy (if the skin cancer is located in an area difficult to treat surgically) Microscopically controlled excision (Mohs surgery) - repeated cutting out of small pieces of tissue that are then examined microscopically to check if any cancer has been left behind; repeated application of this technique minimizes the removal of healthy tissue and is cosmetically more satisfying, especially if carried out with a plastic surgeon as part of the medical team. This is more likely to be used for skin cancers on the nose, ears, and other areas of the face. Cryosurgery - freezing and killing the cancer cells Skin creams and medications - may be used to treat superficial (not very deep) squamous cell carcinoma. The outlook for small squamous cell lesions that are removed early and completely is extremely favorable, with about 95% cured if they are removed promptly.
Squamous cell carcinoma is a cancer that arises from particular cells called squamous cells. Squamous cells are found in the outer layer of skin and in the mucous membranes, which are the moist tissues that line body cavities such as the airways and intestines. Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) develops in the mucous membranes of the mouth, nose, and throat.  HNSCC is classified by its location: it can occur in the mouth (oral cavity), the middle part of the throat near the mouth (oropharynx), the space behind the nose (nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses), the upper part of the throat near the nasal cavity (nasopharynx), the voicebox (larynx), or the lower part of the throat near the larynx (hypopharynx). Depending on the location, the cancer can cause abnormal patches or open sores (ulcers) in the mouth and throat, unusual bleeding or pain in the mouth, sinus congestion that does not clear, sore throat, earache, pain when swallowing or difficulty swallowing, a hoarse voice, difficulty breathing, or enlarged lymph nodes.  HNSCC can spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body, such as the lymph nodes or lungs. If it spreads, the cancer has a worse prognosis and can be fatal. About half of affected individuals survive more than five years after diagnosis.
HNSCC is the seventh most common cancer worldwide. Approximately 600,000 new cases are diagnosed each year, including about 50,000 in the United States. HNSCC occurs most often in men in their 50s or 60s, although the incidence among younger individuals is increasing.
HNSCC is caused by a variety of factors that can alter the DNA in cells. The strongest risk factors for developing this form of cancer are tobacco use (including smoking or using chewing tobacco) and heavy alcohol consumption. In addition, studies have shown that infection with certain strains of human papillomavirus (HPV) is linked to the development of HNSCC. HPV infection accounts for the increasing incidence of HNSCC in younger people.  Researchers have identified mutations in many genes in people with HNSCC; however, it is not yet clear what role most of these mutations play in the development or progression of cancer. The proteins produced from several of the genes associated with HNSCC, including TP53, NOTCH1, and CDKN2A, function as tumor suppressors, which means they normally keep cells from growing and dividing too rapidly or in an uncontrolled way. When tumor suppressors are impaired, cells can grow and divide without control, leading to tumor formation. It is likely that a series of changes in multiple genes is involved in the development and progression of HNSCC.
HNSCC is generally not inherited; it typically arises from mutations in the body's cells that occur during an individual's lifetime. This type of alteration is called a somatic mutation.  Rarely, HNSCC is found in several members of a family. These families have inherited disorders that increase the risk of multiple types of cancer.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma:  - Cancer.Net: Head and Neck Cancer: Treatment Options  - National Cancer Institute: Head and Neck Cancers   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care