Stickler syndrome is a group of hereditary connective tissue disorders characterized by distinctive facial features, eye abnormalities, hearing loss, and joint problems. The features vary widely among affected people. Stickler syndrome type 1 may be divided into 2 subgroups: the membranous vitreous type and a predominantly ocular type. Both are caused by mutations in the COL2A1 gene. Stickler syndrome type II, sometimes called the beaded vitreous type, is caused by mutations in the COL11A1 gene. Stickler syndrome type III, sometimes called the nonocular form, is caused by mutations in the COL11A2 gene. These forms of Stickler syndrome are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Stickler syndrome type IV is caused by mutations in the COL9A1 gene, and Stickler syndrome type V is caused by mutations in the COL9A2 gene. These types of Stickler syndrome are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Stickler syndrome type 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the vitreous humor 90% Cataract 90% Long philtrum 90% Myopia 90% Retinal detachment 90% Short nose 90% Skeletal dysplasia 90% Abnormality of the mitral valve 50% Abnormality of vertebral epiphysis morphology 50% Arthralgia 50% Cleft palate 50% Disproportionate tall stature 50% Joint hypermobility 50% Osteoarthritis 50% Platyspondyly 50% Proptosis 50% Sensorineural hearing impairment 50% Cognitive impairment 7.5% Conductive hearing impairment 7.5% Visual impairment 7.5% Anteverted nares - Arachnodactyly - Arthropathy - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Beaking of vertebral bodies - Blindness - Depressed nasal bridge - Flat midface - Glaucoma - Irregular femoral epiphysis - Kyphosis - Malar flattening - Mitral valve prolapse - Pectus excavatum - Pierre-Robin sequence - Scoliosis - Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Stickler syndrome is a group of hereditary connective tissue disorders characterized by distinctive facial features, eye abnormalities, hearing loss, and joint problems. The features vary widely among affected people. Stickler syndrome type 1 may be divided into 2 subgroups: the membranous vitreous type and a predominantly ocular type. Both are caused by mutations in the COL2A1 gene. Stickler syndrome type II, sometimes called the beaded vitreous type, is caused by mutations in the COL11A1 gene. Stickler syndrome type III, sometimes called the nonocular form, is caused by mutations in the COL11A2 gene. These forms of Stickler syndrome are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Stickler syndrome type IV is caused by mutations in the COL9A1 gene, and Stickler syndrome type V is caused by mutations in the COL9A2 gene. These types of Stickler syndrome are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Stickler syndrome, type 2. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the vitreous humor 90% Cataract 90% Myopia 90% Opacification of the corneal stroma 90% Retinal detachment 90% Sensorineural hearing impairment 90% Cleft palate 50% Retinopathy 50% Anteverted nares - Arachnodactyly - Arthropathy - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Bifid uvula - Depressed nasal bridge - Flat midface - Glaucoma - Joint hypermobility - Long fingers - Malar flattening - Pierre-Robin sequence - Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Stickler syndrome affects an estimated 1 in 7,500 to 9,000 newborns. Type I is the most common form of the condition.
Mutations in several genes cause the different types of Stickler syndrome. Between 80 and 90 percent of all cases are classified as type I and are caused by mutations in the COL2A1 gene. Another 10 to 20 percent of cases are classified as type II and result from mutations in the COL11A1 gene. Marshall syndrome, which may be a variant of Stickler syndrome, is also caused by COL11A1 gene mutations. Stickler syndrome types III through VI result from mutations in other, related genes.  All of the genes associated with Stickler syndrome provide instructions for making components of collagens, which are complex molecules that give structure and strength to the connective tissues that support the body's joints and organs. Mutations in any of these genes impair the production, processing, or assembly of collagen molecules. Defective collagen molecules or reduced amounts of collagen impair the development of connective tissues in many different parts of the body, leading to the varied features of Stickler syndrome.  Not all individuals with Stickler syndrome have mutations in one of the known genes. Researchers believe that mutations in other genes may also cause this condition, but those genes have not been identified.
Stickler syndrome types I, II, and III are inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In some cases, an affected person inherits a gene mutation from one affected parent. Other cases result from new mutations. These cases occur in people with no history of Stickler syndrome in their family.  Marshall syndrome also typically has an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance.  Stickler syndrome types IV, V, and VI are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Autosomal recessive inheritance means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Stickler syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Stickler Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Marshall syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Stickler syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Pierre Robin Syndrome  - Merck Manual Consumer Version: Detachment of the Retina  - Stickler Involved People: Clinical Characteristics & Diagnostic Criteria  - Stickler Involved People: Stickler Syndrome Recognition, Diagnosis, Treatment   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care