Stiff person syndrome (SPS) is a rare neurological disorder with features of an autoimmune disease. Symptoms may include muscle stiffness in the trunk and limbs, and heightened sensitivity to noise, touch, and emotional distress, which can set off muscle spasms. Affected people may also have abnormal postures, such as being hunched over. SPS affects twice as many women as men. It is frequently associated with other autoimmune diseases such as diabetes, thyroiditis, vitiligo, and pernicious anemia. The exact causes of SPS is not known. Treatment may involve high-dose diazepam, anti-convulsants, or intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG).
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Stiff person syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Adult onset - Agoraphobia - Anemia - Anxiety - Asymmetric limb muscle stiffness - Autoimmunity - Axial muscle stiffness - Depression - Exaggerated startle response - Fever - Frequent falls - Hyperhidrosis - Hyperreflexia - Hypertension - Lumbar hyperlordosis - Myoclonic spasms - Opisthotonus - Proximal limb muscle stiffness - Rigidity - Sporadic - Tachycardia - Vitiligo - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Scientists dont yet understand what causes stiff person syndrome, but research indicates that it is the result of an abnormal autoimmune response in the brain and spinal cord. Most people with stiff person syndrome have antibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), a protein in some nerve cells involved in making a substance called gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) that helps to control muscle movement. The symptoms of stiff person syndrome may develop when the immune system mistakenly attacks the neurons that produce GAD, leading to a deficiency of this protein in the body. The exact role that deficiency of GAD plays in the development of stiff person syndrome is not fully understood.
 Genetic factors involved in causing stiff person syndrome have not been established.  While most cases appear to occur in an isolated manner, some familial cases have been reported. The fact that stiff person syndrome can occur with other autoimmune disorders suggests that genetics may play a role.
 Genetic testing is not available for stiff person syndrome, as the underlying genetic cause (if any) has not yet been established. How is stiff person syndrome diagnosed? A diagnosis of stiff person syndrome (SPS) is typically made based on the presence of the characteristic symptoms, a detailed medical history, a thorough clinical exam, and various tests. Specific tests are used to support or confirm the diagnosis, and to rule out conditions with overlapping symptoms. These tests may include screening tests to detect antibodies against glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) and amphiphysin, and an electromyography (EMG) which records electrical activity in skeletal muscles. About 60% to 80% of affected people have autoantibodies against GAD. Although the absence of GAD antibodies does not rule out SPS, the presence of high levels of GAD antibodies in appropriate people strongly supports the diagnosis. An EMG typically shows continuous motor activity, which is characteristic of SPS. Very high levels of GAD antibodies and characteristic EMG findings will confirm the diagnosis in the majority of people with SPS. Additional laboratory testing may also be used to support a diagnosis of SPS, such as hemoglobin A1C (due to association with diabetes mellitus); complete blood count (due to association with pernicious anemia); comprehensive metabolic profile; and thyroid-stimulating hormone (due to association with thyroiditis). Lumbar puncture should be obtained in people with symptoms consistent with SPS to rule out other causes. Oligoclonal bands can be seen in about two thirds of affected people who are antibody-positive.
 Treatment of stiff person syndrome (SPS) focuses on the specific symptoms present in each person. Benzodiazepines may be used to treat muscle stiffness and episodic spasms; baclofen may be used in addition to benzodiazepines. Anti-seizure drugs have reportedly been effective for some people. More recently, studies have shown that intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) is effective in improving many of the symptoms of SPS. Research involving additional treatment options for SPS is ongoing. Additional information about the treatment of stiff person syndrome can be viewed on Medscape Reference's Web site.