Your stomach is an organ between your esophagus and small intestine. It is where digestion of protein begins. The stomach has three tasks. It stores swallowed food. It mixes the food with stomach acids. Then it sends the mixture on to the small intestine.    Most people have a problem with their stomach at one time or another. Indigestion and heartburn are common problems. You can relieve some stomach problems with over-the-counter medicines and lifestyle changes, such as avoiding fatty foods or eating more slowly. Other problems like peptic ulcers or GERD require medical attention.     You should see a doctor if you have any of the following:       - Blood when you have a bowel movement    - Severe abdominal pain    - Heartburn not relieved by antacids     - Unintended weight loss     - Ongoing vomiting or diarrhea       NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
The stomach is an organ between the esophagus and the small intestine. It mixes food with stomach acid and helps digest protein. Stomach cancer mostly affects older people - two-thirds of people who have it are over age 65. Your risk of getting it is also higher if you       - Have had a Helicobacter pylori infection    - Have had stomach inflammation    - Are a man    - Eat lots of salted, smoked, or pickled foods     - Smoke cigarettes     - Have a family history of stomach cancer       It is hard to diagnose stomach cancer in its early stages. Indigestion and stomach discomfort can be symptoms of early cancer, but other problems can cause the same symptoms. In advanced cases, there may be blood in your stool, vomiting, unexplained weight loss, jaundice, or trouble swallowing. Doctors diagnose stomach cancer with a physical exam, blood and imaging tests, an endoscopy, and a biopsy.    Because it is often found late, it can be hard to treat stomach cancer. Treatment options include surgery, chemotherapy, radiation or a combination.    NIH: National Cancer Institute
Familial stomach cancer is a cluster of stomach cancer within a family. Most cases of stomach cancer occur sporadically in people with little to no family history of the condition; however, approximately 10% of stomach cancer is considered "familial." Although the underlying cause of some familial cases is unknown, genetic changes (mutations) are identified in a subset of people affected by gastric cancer. Hereditary cancer syndromes associated with a predisposition to gastric cancer include hereditary diffuse gastric cancer, Lynch syndrome, Li-Fraumeni syndrome, familial adenomatous polyposis, and Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. In other families, the cluster of stomach cancers may be due to a combination of gene(s) and/or other shared factors such as environment and lifestyle. Depending on the estimated risk, high-risk cancer screening and/or prophylactic surgeries are typically recommended in people who have an increased risk for stomach cancer based on their personal and/or family histories.