Platelet storage pool deficiency refers to a group of conditions that are caused by problems with the platelet granules. Platelet granules are tiny storage sacs found within the platelets which release various substances to help stop bleeding. Platelet storage pool deficiencies occur when platelet granules are absent, reduced in number, or unable to empty their contents into the bloodstream. The signs and symptoms include frequent nosebleeds; abnormally heavy or prolonged menstruation; easy bruising; recurrent anemia; and abnormal bleeding after surgery, dental work or childbirth. Platelet storage pool deficiencies may be genetic or acquired (non-genetic). They can also be part of an inherited genetic syndrome such as Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome, Chediak-Higashi syndrome, thrombocytopenia-absent radius (TAR) syndrome, and Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Treatment is symptomatic.
The signs and symptoms of platelet storage pool deficiency vary but may include: Frequent nosebleeds Abnormally heavy or prolonged menstruation Easy bruising Recurrent anemia Abnormal bleeding after surgery, dental work or childbirth The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Platelet storage pool deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal bleeding - Acute leukemia - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Decreased mean platelet volume - Myelodysplasia - Prolonged bleeding time - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Platelet storage pool deficiency refers to a group of conditions that are caused by problems with the platelet granules. Platelet granules are tiny storage sacs found within the platelets which release various substances to help stop bleeding. Some platelet storage pool deficiencies are due to reduced or absent granules or granule contents. Others occur if the platelets are unable to empty the contents of the platelet granules into the bloodstream.  Platelet storage pool deficiencies can be genetic or acquired (non-genetic). The four major genetic forms include dense body deficiency, gray platelet syndrome, Factor V Quebec, and mixed alpha-granule/dense body deficiency. Platelet storage pool deficiency is also a feature of several inherited conditions such as Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome, Chediak-Higashi syndrome, thrombocytopenia-absent radius (TAR) syndrome, and Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Causes of acquired platelet storage pool deficiencies include: Systemic lupus erythematosus Cardiovascular bypass Hairy-cell leukemia
 A diagnosis of platelet storage pool deficiency is often suspected based on the presence of characteristic signs and symptoms. Specialized laboratory tests can then be ordered to confirm the diagnosis. This testing may include: Bleeding time studies Platelet aggregation studies Peripheral blood smear Flow cytometry (detects a reduction in certain types of granules in affected platelets)
 Treatment for platelet storage pool deficiency is symptomatic. For example, people who have severe episodes of bleeding may require platelet transfusions or antifibrinolytic medications, particularly during periods of high risk such as during surgical procedures or after an injury. Transfusions are generally used with caution as the potential risks often outweigh the benefits when bleeding is not life-threatening. People with a platelet storage pool deficiency should avoid antiplatelet drugs such as aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS).