The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Glycogen storage disease type 12. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Intellectual disability 7.5% Myopathy 7.5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cholecystitis - Cholelithiasis - Delayed puberty - Epicanthus - Jaundice - Low posterior hairline - Nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia - Normochromic anemia - Normocytic anemia - Ptosis - Short neck - Short stature - Splenomegaly - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Glycogen storage disease type 13 (GSD13), also known as -enolase deficiency, is an inherited disease of the muscles.  The muscles of an affected individual are not able to produce enough energy to function properly, causing muscle weakness and pain.  GSD13 is caused by changes (mutations) in the ENO3 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
 Glycogen storage disease type 13 causes muscle pain (myalgia).  Individuals with GSD13 also experience exercise intolerance, which means they have difficulty exercising because they may have muscle weakness and tire easily. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Glycogen storage disease type 13. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Adult onset - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Elevated serum creatine phosphokinase - Exercise intolerance - Increased muscle glycogen content - Myalgia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Glycogen storage disease type 13 (GSD13) is caused by changes (mutations) in the ENO3 gene.  Glycogen is a substance that is stored in muscle tissue and is used as an important source of energy for the muscles during movement and exercise.  The ENO3 gene makes a chemical called enolase, which is an enzyme that helps the muscles use glycogen for energy.  In GSD13, the ENO3 genes do not work properly such that the body cannot make enolase, and as a result, the muscles do not have enough energy to work properly.
 Glycogen storage disease type 13 is diagnosed by taking a sample of muscle tissue (muscle biopsy) to determine if there is enough of the chemical enolase working in the muscle cells.  Genetic testing can also be done to look for changes (mutations) in the ENO3 gene.
Glycogen storage disease type 7 (GSD7) is an inherited condition in which the body is unable to break down glycogen (a complex sugar) in the muscle cells. Because glycogen is an important source of energy, this can interfere with the normal functioning of muscle cells. The severity of the condition and the associated signs and symptoms vary, but may include muscle weakness and stiffness; painful muscle cramps; nausea and vomiting; and/or myoglobinuria (the presence of myoglobin in the urine) following moderate to strenuous exercise. Symptoms typically resolve with rest. GSD7 is most commonly diagnosed during childhood; however, some affected people may rarely develop symptoms during infancy or later in adulthood. Those who develop the condition during infancy may experience additional symptoms such as hypotonia (poor muscle tone), cardiomyopathy and breathing difficulties that often lead to a shortened lifespan (less than 1 year). This condition is caused by changes (mutations) in the PFKM gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. There is no specific treatment for GSD7; however, affected people are generally advised to avoid vigorous exercise and high-carbohydrate meals.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Glycogen storage disease type 7. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Myotonia 90% Skeletal muscle atrophy 50% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cholelithiasis - Exercise intolerance - Exercise-induced muscle cramps - Exercise-induced myoglobinuria - Gout - Hemolytic anemia - Increased muscle glycogen content - Increased total bilirubin - Jaundice - Muscle weakness - Reduced erythrocyte 2,3-diphosphoglycerate concentration - Reticulocytosis - Variable expressivity - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Glycogen storage disease type 6 is a genetic disease in which the liver cannot process sugar properly.  Symptoms usually begin in infancy or childhood and include low blood sugar (hypoglycemia), an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly), or an increase in the amount of lactic acid in the blood (lactic acidosis) particularly when an individual does not eat for a long time.  Symptoms improve significantly as individuals with this condition get older.  Glycogen storage disease type 6 is caused by mutations in the PYGL gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Glycogen storage disease type 6. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Hypoglycemia 90% Short stature 90% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Hepatomegaly - Increased hepatic glycogen content - Postnatal growth retardation - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Glycogen storage disease type 1B (GSD1B) is an inherited condition in which the body is unable to break down a complex sugar called glycogen. As a result, glycogen accumulates in cells throughout the body. In GSD1B, specifically, glycogen and fats build up within the liver and kidneys which can cause these organs to be enlarged and not function properly. Signs and symptoms of the condition generally develop at age 3 to 4 months and may include hypoglycemia, seizures, lactic acidosis, hyperuricemia (high levels of a waste product called uric acid in the body), and hyperlipidemia. Affected people may also have short stature; thin arms and legs; a protruding abdomen; neutropenia (which may lead to frequent infections); inflammatory bowel disease and oral health problems. GSD1B is caused by changes (mutations) in the SLC37A4 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Although there is currently no cure for the condition, symptoms can often be managed with a special diet in combination with certain medications.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Glycogen storage disease type 1B. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Decreased glomerular filtration rate - Delayed puberty - Doll-like facies - Elevated hepatic transaminases - Enlarged kidneys - Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis - Gout - Hepatocellular carcinoma - Hepatomegaly - Hyperlipidemia - Hypertension - Hypoglycemia - Lactic acidosis - Lipemia retinalis - Nephrolithiasis - Neutropenia - Oral ulcer - Osteoporosis - Pancreatitis - Proteinuria - Protuberant abdomen - Recurrent bacterial infections - Short stature - Xanthomatosis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Glycogen storage disease type 4 (GSD 4) is part of a group of disorders which lead to abnormal accumulation of glycogen (a storage form of glucose) in various parts of the body. Symptoms of GSD 4 usually begin in infancy and typically include failure to thrive; enlarged liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly); and in many cases, progressive liver cirrhosis and liver failure. In rare cases individuals may have a form with non-progressive liver disease, or a severe neuromuscular form. GSD 4 is caused by mutations in the GBE1 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment typically focuses on the specific symptoms that are present in each individual.
 Glycogen storage disease type 4 (GSD 4) is caused by mutations in the GBE1 gene. The GBE1 gene normally provides instructions for making the glycogen branching enzyme. This enzyme is necessary for making glycogen, a major source of stored energy in the body. Glycogen is formed by assembling many molecules of glucose. The glycogen branching enzyme is involved in the formation of "branches" of glucose chains, which help to make glycogen more compact for storage and allows it to break down more easily when it is needed for energy. The GBE1 gene mutations that cause GSD 4 lead to a decrease in the amount or functionality of the glycogen branching enzyme. Glycogen is then not formed properly, and substances called polyglucosan bodies build up in cells throughout the body, causing the signs and symptoms of the condition.
How  Glycogen storage disease type 4 is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that an individual must have 2 abnormal copies of the GBE1 gene to be affected (one abnormal copy inherited from each parent). Individuals with one abnormal copy of the GBE1 gene, such as the parents of an affected individual, are referred to as carriers. Carriers typically do not have signs or symptoms of an autosomal recessive condition. When two carriers of an autosomal recessive condition are having children, each of their children has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to be affected, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be a carrier like each parent, and a 25% chance to not be a carrier and not be affected.
 Management of glycogen storage disease type 4 typically focuses on the signs and symptoms that are present in each individual. Studies have show that in some cases, strict dietary therapy can help to maintain normal levels of glucose in the blood, reduce liver size, reduce symptoms, and allow for improved growth and development. Growing evidence indicates that a high-protein diet may improve muscle function in individuals with weakness or exercise intolerance and slow disease progression. Supportive care is typically needed for complications such as liver failure, heart failure, and neurologic dysfunction. Liver transplantation may be necessary for individuals with progressive liver disease. Individuals with cardiomyopathy may require the use of certain medications.
Glycogen storage disease type VII (GSDVII) is an inherited disorder caused by an inability to break down a complex sugar called glycogen in muscle cells. A lack of glycogen breakdown interferes with the function of muscle cells.  There are four types of GSDVII. They are differentiated by their signs and symptoms and the age at which symptoms first appear.  The classical form of GSDVII is the most common form. Its features usually appear in childhood. This form is characterized by muscle pain and cramps, often following moderate exercise; strenuous exercise can lead to nausea and vomiting. During exercise, muscle tissue can be abnormally broken down, releasing a protein called myoglobin. This protein is processed by the kidneys and released in the urine (myoglobinuria). If untreated, myoglobinuria can damage the kidneys and lead to kidney failure. Some people with the classical form of GSDVII develop high levels of a waste product called uric acid in the blood (hyperuricemia) because the damaged kidneys are unable to remove uric acid effectively. Affected individuals may also have elevated levels of a molecule called bilirubin in the blood that can cause yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice). Individuals with classical GSDVII often have elevated levels of an enzyme called creatine kinase in their blood. This finding is a common indicator of muscle disease.  Infants with the severe infantile form of GSDVII have low muscle tone (hypotonia) at birth, which leads to muscle weakness (myopathy) that worsens over time. Affected infants have a weakened and enlarged heart (cardiomyopathy) and difficulty breathing normally. Individuals with this form of GSDVII usually do not survive past their first year of life.  In the late-onset form of GSDVII, myopathy is typically the only feature. The muscle weakness appears in adulthood, although some individuals have difficulty with sustained exercise starting in childhood. The weakness generally affects the muscles closest to the center of the body (proximal muscles).  The hemolytic form of GSDVII is characterized by hemolytic anemia, in which red blood cells are broken down (undergo hemolysis) prematurely, causing a shortage of red blood cells (anemia). People with the hemolytic form of GSDVII do not experience any signs or symptoms of muscle pain or weakness related to the disorder.
GSDVII is thought to be a rare condition; more than 100 cases have been described in the scientific literature.
Mutations in the PFKM gene cause GSDVII. This gene provides instructions for making one piece (the PFKM subunit) of an enzyme called phosphofructokinase, which plays a role in the breakdown of glycogen. The phosphofructokinase enzyme is made up of four subunits and is found in a variety of tissues. Different combinations of subunits are found in different tissues. In muscles used for movement (skeletal muscles), the phosphofructokinase enzyme is composed solely of PFKM subunits.  In skeletal muscle, the cells' main source of energy is stored as glycogen. Glycogen can be broken down rapidly into the simple sugar glucose when energy is needed, for instance to maintain normal blood sugar levels between meals or for energy during exercise. Phosphofructokinase is involved in the sequence of events that breaks down glycogen to provide energy to muscle cells.  PFKM gene mutations result in the production of PFKM subunits that have little or no function. As a result, no functional phosphofructokinase is formed in skeletal muscles, and glycogen cannot be completely broken down. Partially broken down glycogen then builds up in muscle cells. Muscles that do not have access to glycogen as an energy source become weakened and cramped following moderate strain, such as exercise, and in some cases, begin to break down. In other tissues, other subunits that make up the phosphofructokinase enzyme likely compensate for the lack of PFKM subunits, and the enzyme is able to retain some function. This compensation may help explain why other tissues are not affected by PFKM gene mutations. It is unclear why some individuals with GSDVII are affected with more severe forms of the disorder than others.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of glycogen storage disease type VII:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Glycogen storage disease, type VII  - The Swedish Information Centre for Rare Diseases   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
GSD IV is estimated to occur in 1 in 600,000 to 800,000 individuals worldwide. Type IV accounts for roughly 3 percent of all cases of glycogen storage disease.
Mutations in the GBE1 gene cause GSD IV. The GBE1 gene provides instructions for making the glycogen branching enzyme. This enzyme is involved in the production of glycogen, which is a major source of stored energy in the body. GBE1 gene mutations that cause GSD IV lead to a shortage (deficiency) of the glycogen branching enzyme. As a result, glycogen is not formed properly. Abnormal glycogen molecules called polyglucosan bodies accumulate in cells, leading to damage and cell death. Polyglucosan bodies accumulate in cells throughout the body, but liver cells and muscle cells are most severely affected in GSD IV. Glycogen accumulation in the liver leads to hepatomegaly and interferes with liver functioning. The inability of muscle cells to break down glycogen for energy leads to muscle weakness and wasting.  Generally, the severity of the disorder is linked to the amount of functional glycogen branching enzyme that is produced. Individuals with the fatal perinatal neuromuscular type tend to produce less than 5 percent of usable enzyme, while those with the childhood neuromuscular type may have around 20 percent of enzyme function. The other types of GSD IV are usually associated with between 5 and 20 percent of working enzyme. These estimates, however, vary among the different types.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of glycogen storage disease type IV:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Glycogen Storage Disease Type IV  - Genetic Testing Registry: Glycogen storage disease, type IV  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Dilated Cardiomyopathy  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Failure to Thrive   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
The overall incidence of GSDI is 1 in 100,000 individuals. GSDIa is more common than GSDIb, accounting for 80 percent of all GSDI cases.
Mutations in two genes, G6PC and SLC37A4, cause GSDI. G6PC gene mutations cause GSDIa, and SLC37A4 gene mutations cause GSDIb.  The proteins produced from the G6PC and SLC37A4 genes work together to break down a type of sugar molecule called glucose 6-phosphate. The breakdown of this molecule produces the simple sugar glucose, which is the primary energy source for most cells in the body.  Mutations in the G6PC and SLC37A4 genes prevent the effective breakdown of glucose 6-phosphate. Glucose 6-phosphate that is not broken down to glucose is converted to glycogen and fat so it can be stored within cells. Too much glycogen and fat stored within a cell can be toxic. This buildup damages organs and tissues throughout the body, particularly the liver and kidneys, leading to the signs and symptoms of GSDI.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of glycogen storage disease type I:  - American Liver Foundation  - Canadian Liver Foundation  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Glycogen Storage Disease Type I  - Genetic Testing Registry: Glucose-6-phosphate transport defect  - Genetic Testing Registry: Glycogen storage disease type 1A  - Genetic Testing Registry: Glycogen storage disease, type I  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Von Gierke Disease   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Glycogen storage disease type 0 (also known as GSD 0) is a condition caused by the body's inability to form a complex sugar called glycogen, which is a major source of stored energy in the body. GSD 0 has two types: in muscle GSD 0, glycogen formation in the muscles is impaired, and in liver GSD 0, glycogen formation in the liver is impaired.  The signs and symptoms of muscle GSD 0 typically begin in early childhood. Affected individuals often experience muscle pain and weakness or episodes of fainting (syncope) following moderate physical activity, such as walking up stairs. The loss of consciousness that occurs with fainting typically lasts up to several hours. Some individuals with muscle GSD 0 have a disruption of the heart's normal rhythm (arrhythmia) known as long QT syndrome. In all affected individuals, muscle GSD 0 impairs the heart's ability to effectively pump blood and increases the risk of cardiac arrest and sudden death, particularly after physical activity. Sudden death from cardiac arrest can occur in childhood or adolescence in people with muscle GSD 0.  Individuals with liver GSD 0 usually show signs and symptoms of the disorder in infancy. People with this disorder develop low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) after going long periods of time without food (fasting). Signs of hypoglycemia become apparent when affected infants begin sleeping through the night and stop late-night feedings; these infants exhibit extreme tiredness (lethargy), pale skin (pallor), and nausea. During episodes of fasting, ketone levels in the blood may increase (ketosis). Ketones are molecules produced during the breakdown of fats, which occurs when stored sugars (such as glycogen) are unavailable. These short-term signs and symptoms of liver GSD 0 often improve when food is eaten and sugar levels in the body return to normal. The features of liver GSD 0 vary; they can be mild and go unnoticed for years, or they can include developmental delay and growth failure.
The prevalence of GSD 0 is unknown; fewer than 10 people with the muscle type and fewer than 30 people with the liver type have been described in the scientific literature. Because some people with muscle GSD 0 die from sudden cardiac arrest early in life before a diagnosis is made and many with liver GSD 0 have mild signs and symptoms, it is thought that GSD 0 may be underdiagnosed.
Mutations in the GYS1 gene cause muscle GSD 0, and mutations in the GYS2 gene cause liver GSD 0. These genes provide instructions for making different versions of an enzyme called glycogen synthase. Both versions of glycogen synthase have the same function, to form glycogen molecules by linking together molecules of the simple sugar glucose, although they perform this function in different regions of the body.  The GYS1 gene provides instructions for making muscle glycogen synthase; this form of the enzyme is produced in most cells, but it is especially abundant in heart (cardiac) muscle and the muscles used for movement (skeletal muscles). During cardiac muscle contractions or rapid or sustained movement of skeletal muscle, glycogen stored in muscle cells is broken down to supply the cells with energy.  The GYS2 gene provides instructions for making liver glycogen synthase, which is produced solely in liver cells. Glycogen that is stored in the liver can be broken down rapidly when glucose is needed to maintain normal blood sugar levels between meals.  Mutations in the GYS1 or GYS2 gene lead to a lack of functional glycogen synthase, which prevents the production of glycogen from glucose. Mutations that cause GSD 0 result in a complete absence of glycogen in either liver or muscle cells. As a result, these cells do not have glycogen as a source of stored energy to draw upon following physical activity or fasting. This shortage of glycogen leads to the signs and symptoms of GSD 0.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of glycogen storage disease type 0:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Glycogen storage disease 0, muscle  - Genetic Testing Registry: Hypoglycemia with deficiency of glycogen synthetase in the liver   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Glycogen storage disease type V (also known as GSDV or McArdle disease) is an inherited disorder caused by an inability to break down a complex sugar called glycogen in muscle cells. A lack of glycogen breakdown interferes with the function of muscle cells.  People with GSDV typically experience fatigue, muscle pain, and cramps during the first few minutes of exercise (exercise intolerance). Exercise such as weight lifting or jogging usually triggers these symptoms in affected individuals. The discomfort is generally alleviated with rest. If individuals rest after brief exercise and wait for their pain to go away, they can usually resume exercising with little or no discomfort (a characteristic phenomenon known as "second wind").  Prolonged or intense exercise can cause muscle damage in people with GSDV. About half of people with GSDV experience breakdown of muscle tissue (rhabdomyolysis). In severe episodes, the destruction of muscle tissue releases a protein called myoglobin, which is filtered through the kidneys and released in the urine (myoglobinuria). Myoglobin causes the urine to be red or brown. This protein can also damage the kidneys, and it is estimated that half of those individuals with GSDV who have myoglobinuria will develop life-threatening kidney failure.  The signs and symptoms of GSDV can vary significantly in affected individuals. The features of this condition typically begin in a person's teens or twenties, but they can appear anytime from infancy to adulthood. In most people with GSDV, the muscle weakness worsens over time; however, in about one-third of affected individuals, the muscle weakness is stable. Some people with GSDV experience mild symptoms such as poor stamina; others do not experience any symptoms.
GSDV is a rare disorder; however, its prevalence is unknown. In the Dallas-Fort Worth area of Texas, where the prevalence of GSDV has been studied, the condition is estimated to affect 1 in 100,000 individuals.
Mutations in the PYGM gene cause GSDV. The PYGM gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called myophosphorylase. This enzyme is found only in muscle cells, where it breaks down glycogen into a simpler sugar called glucose-1-phosphate. Additional steps convert glucose-1-phosphate into glucose, a simple sugar that is the main energy source for most cells.  PYGM gene mutations prevent myophosphorylase from breaking down glycogen effectively. As a result, muscle cells cannot produce enough energy, so muscles become easily fatigued. Reduced energy production in muscle cells leads to the major features of GSDV.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of glycogen storage disease type V:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Glycogen Storage Disease Type V  - Genetic Testing Registry: Glycogen storage disease, type V  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: McArdle syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Glycogen storage disease type IX (also known as GSD IX) is a condition caused by the inability to break down a complex sugar called glycogen. The different forms of the condition can affect glycogen breakdown in liver cells or muscle cells or sometimes both. A lack of glycogen breakdown interferes with the normal function of the affected tissue.  When GSD IX affects the liver, the signs and symptoms typically begin in early childhood. The initial features are usually an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly) and slow growth. Affected children are often shorter than normal. During prolonged periods without food (fasting), affected individuals may have low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) or elevated levels of ketones in the blood (ketosis). Ketones are molecules produced during the breakdown of fats, which occurs when stored sugars are unavailable. Affected children may have delayed development of motor skills, such as sitting, standing, or walking, and some have mild muscle weakness. Puberty is delayed in some adolescents with GSD IX. In the form of the condition that affects the liver, the signs and symptoms usually improve with age. Typically, individuals catch up developmentally, and adults reach normal height. However, some affected individuals have a buildup of scar tissue (fibrosis) in the liver, which can rarely progress to irreversible liver disease (cirrhosis).  GSD IX can affect muscle tissue, although this form of the condition is very rare and not well understood. The features of this form of the condition can appear anytime from childhood to adulthood. Affected individuals may experience fatigue, muscle pain, and cramps, especially during exercise (exercise intolerance). Most affected individuals have muscle weakness that worsens over time. GSD IX can cause myoglobinuria, which occurs when muscle tissue breaks down abnormally and releases a protein called myoglobin that is excreted in the urine. Myoglobinuria can cause the urine to be red or brown.  In a small number of people with GSD IX, the liver and muscles are both affected. These individuals develop a combination of the features described above, although the muscle problems are usually mild.
GSD IX that affects the liver is estimated to occur in 1 in 100,000 people. The forms of the disease that affect muscles or both muscles and liver are much less common, although the prevalence is unknown.
Mutations in the PHKA1, PHKA2, PHKB, or PHKG2 genes are known to cause GSD IX. These genes provide instructions for making pieces (subunits) of an enzyme called phosphorylase b kinase. The enzyme is made up of 16 subunits, four each of the alpha, beta, gamma, and delta subunits. At least two different versions of phosphorylase b kinase are formed from the subunits: one is most abundant in liver cells and the other in muscle cells.  The PHKA1 and PHKA2 genes provide instructions for making alpha subunits of phosphorylase b kinase. The protein produced from the PHKA1 gene is a subunit of the muscle enzyme, while the protein produced from the PHKA2 gene is part of the liver enzyme. The PHKB gene provides instructions for making the beta subunit, which is found in both the muscle and the liver. The PHKG2 gene provides instructions for making the gamma subunit of the liver enzyme.  Whether in the liver or the muscles, phosphorylase b kinase plays an important role in providing energy for cells. The main source of cellular energy is a simple sugar called glucose. Glucose is stored in muscle and liver cells in a form called glycogen. Glycogen can be broken down rapidly when glucose is needed, for instance to maintain normal levels of glucose in the blood between meals or for energy during exercise. Phosphorylase b kinase turns on (activates) the enzyme that breaks down glycogen.  Although the effects of gene mutations on the respective protein subunits are unknown, mutations in the PHKA1, PHKA2, PHKB, and PHKG2 genes reduce the activity of phosphorylase b kinase in liver or muscle cells and in blood cells. Reduction of this enzyme's function impairs glycogen breakdown. As a result, glycogen accumulates in and damages cells, and glucose is not available for energy. Glycogen accumulation in the liver leads to hepatomegaly, and the liver's inability to break down glycogen for glucose contributes to hypoglycemia and ketosis. Reduced energy production in muscle cells leads to muscle weakness, pain, and cramping.
GSD IX can have different inheritance patterns depending on the genetic cause of the condition.  When caused by mutations in the PHKA1 or PHKA2 gene, GSD IX is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. These genes are located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. However, some women with one altered copy of the PHKA2 gene have signs and symptoms of GSD IX, such as mild hepatomegaly or short stature in childhood. These features are usually mild but can be more severe in rare cases. Because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.  When the condition is caused by mutations in the PHKB or PHKG2 gene, it is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of glycogen storage disease type IX:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Phosphorylase Kinase Deficiency  - Genetic Testing Registry: Glycogen storage disease IXb  - Genetic Testing Registry: Glycogen storage disease IXc  - Genetic Testing Registry: Glycogen storage disease IXd  - Genetic Testing Registry: Glycogen storage disease type IXa1   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Glycogen storage disease type VI (also known as GSDVI or Hers disease) is an inherited disorder caused by an inability to break down a complex sugar called glycogen in liver cells. A lack of glycogen breakdown interferes with the normal function of the liver.  The signs and symptoms of GSDVI typically begin in infancy to early childhood. The first sign is usually an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly). Affected individuals may also have low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) or a buildup of lactic acid in the body (lactic acidosis) during prolonged periods without food (fasting).  The signs and symptoms of GSDVI tend to improve with age; most adults with this condition do not have any related health problems.
The exact prevalence of GSDVI is unknown. At least 11 cases have been reported in the medical literature, although this condition is likely to be underdiagnosed because it can be difficult to detect in children with mild symptoms or adults with no symptoms. GSDVI is more common in the Old Older Mennonite population, with an estimated incidence of 1 in 1,000 individuals.
Mutations in the PYGL gene cause GSDVI. The PYGL gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called liver glycogen phosphorylase. This enzyme is found only in liver cells, where it breaks down glycogen into a type of sugar called glucose-1-phosphate. Additional steps convert glucose-1-phosphate into glucose, a simple sugar that is the main energy source for most cells in the body.  PYGL gene mutations prevent liver glycogen phosphorylase from breaking down glycogen effectively. As a result, liver cells cannot use glycogen for energy. Since glycogen cannot be broken down, it accumulates within liver cells, causing these cells to become enlarged and dysfunctional.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of glycogen storage disease type VI:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Glycogen Storage Disease Type VI  - Genetic Testing Registry: Glycogen storage disease, type VI   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care
Glycogen storage disease type III (also known as GSDIII or Cori disease) is an inherited disorder caused by the buildup of a complex sugar called glycogen in the body's cells. The accumulated glycogen is structurally abnormal and impairs the function of certain organs and tissues, especially the liver and muscles.  GSDIII is divided into types IIIa, IIIb, IIIc, and IIId, which are distinguished by their pattern of signs and symptoms. GSD types IIIa and IIIc mainly affect the liver and muscles, and GSD types IIIb and IIId typically affect only the liver. It is very difficult to distinguish between the types of GSDIII that affect the same tissues. GSD types IIIa and IIIb are the most common forms of this condition.  Beginning in infancy, individuals with any type of GSDIII may have low blood sugar (hypoglycemia), excess amounts of fats in the blood (hyperlipidemia), and elevated blood levels of liver enzymes. As they get older, children with this condition typically develop an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly). Liver size usually returns to normal during adolescence, but some affected individuals develop chronic liver disease (cirrhosis) and liver failure later in life. People with GSDIII often have slow growth because of their liver problems, which can lead to short stature. In a small percentage of people with GSDIII, noncancerous (benign) tumors called adenomas may form in the liver.  Individuals with GSDIIIa may develop muscle weakness (myopathy) later in life. These muscle problems can affect both heart (cardiac) muscle and the muscles that are used for movement (skeletal muscles). Muscle involvement varies greatly among affected individuals. The first signs and symptoms are typically poor muscle tone (hypotonia) and mild myopathy in early childhood. The myopathy may become severe by early to mid-adulthood. Some people with GSDIIIa have a weakened heart muscle (cardiomyopathy), but affected individuals usually do not experience heart failure. Other people affected with GSDIIIa have no cardiac muscle problems.
The incidence of GSDIII in the United States is 1 in 100,000 individuals. This condition is seen more frequently in people of North African Jewish ancestry; in this population, 1 in 5,400 individuals are estimated to be affected.  GSDIIIa is the most common form of GSDIII, accounting for about 85 percent of all cases. GSDIIIb accounts for about 15 percent of cases. GSD types IIIc and IIId are very rare, and their signs and symptoms are poorly defined. Only a small number of affected individuals have been suspected to have GSD types IIIc and IIId.
Mutations in the AGL gene cause GSDIII. The AGL gene provides instructions for making the glycogen debranching enzyme. This enzyme is involved in the breakdown of glycogen, which is a major source of stored energy in the body. Between meals the body breaks down stores of energy, such as glycogen, to use for fuel.  Most AGL gene mutations lead to the production of a nonfunctional glycogen debranching enzyme. These mutations typically cause GSD types IIIa and IIIb. The mutations that cause GSD types IIIc and IIId are thought to lead to the production of an enzyme with reduced function. All AGL gene mutations lead to storage of abnormal, partially broken down glycogen molecules within cells. A buildup of abnormal glycogen damages organs and tissues throughout the body, particularly the liver and muscles, leading to the signs and symptoms of GSDIII.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of glycogen storage disease type III:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Glycogen Storage Disease Type III  - Genetic Testing Registry: Glycogen storage disease type III   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care