Some brain cells die because they stop getting the oxygen and nutrients they need to function. Other brain cells die because they are damaged by sudden bleeding into or around the brain. The brain cells that don't die immediately remain at risk for death. These cells can linger in a compromised or weakened state for several hours. With timely treatment these cells can be saved. Knowing stroke symptoms, calling 911 immediately, and getting to a hospital as quickly as possible are critical.
Stroke occurs in all age groups, in both sexes, and in all races in every country. It can even occur before birth, when the fetus is still in the womb. Studies show the risk of stroke doubles for each decade between the ages of 55 and 85. However, a recent study found that stroke rates are on the rise for people under 55.
Warning signs are clues your body sends to tell you that your brain is not receiving enough oxygen. These are warning signs of a stroke, or brain attack: - sudden numbness or weakness of the face, arm, or leg, especially on one side of the body  - sudden confusion, trouble speaking or understanding  - sudden trouble seeing in one or both eyes  - sudden trouble walking, dizziness, loss of balance or coordination  - sudden severe headache with no known cause. sudden numbness or weakness of the face, arm, or leg, especially on one side of the body sudden confusion, trouble speaking or understanding sudden trouble seeing in one or both eyes sudden trouble walking, dizziness, loss of balance or coordination sudden severe headache with no known cause. If you observe one or more of these signs, don't wait. Call 911 right away!
Doctors have several techniques and imaging tools to help diagnose stroke quickly and accurately. The first step in diagnosis is a short neurological examination, or an evaluation of the nervous system. When a possible stroke patient arrives at a hospital, a health care professional, usually a doctor or nurse, will ask the patient or a companion what happened and when the symptoms began. Blood tests, an electrocardiogram, and a brain scan such as computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) will often be done.
With stroke, treatment depends on the stage of the disease. There are three treatment stages for stroke: prevention, therapy immediately after stroke, and rehabilitation after stroke. Stroke treatments include medications, surgery, and rehabilitation.
A stroke is a medical emergency. There are two types - ischemic and hemorrhagic. Hemorrhagic stroke is the less common type. It happens when a blood vessel breaks and bleeds into the brain. Within minutes, brain cells begin to die. Causes include a bleeding aneurysm, an arteriovenous malformation (AVM), or an artery wall that breaks open.    Symptoms of stroke are       - Sudden numbness or weakness of the face, arm or leg (especially on one side of the body)    - Sudden confusion, trouble speaking or understanding speech    - Sudden trouble seeing in one or both eyes    - Sudden trouble walking, dizziness, loss of balance or coordination    - Sudden severe headache with no known cause       It is important to treat strokes as quickly as possible. With a hemorrhagic stroke, the first steps are to find the cause of bleeding in the brain and then control it. Surgery may be needed. Post-stroke rehabilitation can help people overcome disabilities caused by stroke damage.    National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
A stroke is a medical emergency. There are two types - ischemic and hemorrhagic. Ischemic stroke is the most common type. It is usually caused by a blood clot that blocks or plugs a blood vessel in the brain. This keeps blood from flowing to the brain. Within minutes, brain cells begin to die. Another cause is stenosis, or narrowing of the artery. This can happen because of atherosclerosis, a disease in which plaque builds up inside your arteries. Transient ischemic attacks (TIAs) occur when the blood supply to the brain is interrupted briefly. Having a TIA can mean you are at risk for having a more serious stroke.    Symptoms of stroke are       - Sudden numbness or weakness of the face, arm or leg (especially on one side of the body)    - Sudden confusion, trouble speaking or understanding speech    - Sudden trouble seeing in one or both eyes    - Sudden trouble walking, dizziness, loss of balance or coordination    - Sudden severe headache with no known cause       It is important to treat strokes as quickly as possible. Blood thinners may be used to stop a stroke while it is happening by quickly dissolving the blood clot. Post-stroke rehabilitation can help people overcome disabilities caused by stroke damage.    NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
Taking action to control your risk factors can help prevent or delay a stroke. If youve already had a stroke, these actions can help prevent another one.
                
Be physically active. Physical activity can improve your fitness level and health. Talk with your doctor about what types and amounts of activity are safe for you.
                
Dont smoke, or if you smoke or use tobacco, quit. Smoking can damage and tighten blood vessels and raise your risk of stroke. Talk with your doctor about programs and products that can help you quit. Also, secondhand smoke can damage the bloodvessels.
                
Maintain a healthy weight. If youre overweight or obese, work with your doctor to create a reasonable weight loss plan. Controlling your weight helps you control risk factors for stroke.
                
Make heart-healthy eating choices. Heart-healthy eating can help lower your risk or prevent a stroke.
                
Manage stress. Use techniques to lower your stress levels.
                
If you or someone in your family has had a stroke, be sure to tell your doctor. By knowing your family history of stroke, you may be able to lower your risk factors and prevent or delay a stroke. If youve had a transient ischemic attack (TIA), dont ignore it. TIAs are warnings, and its important for your doctor to find the cause of the TIA so you can take steps to prevent a stroke.
Although stroke is a disease of the brain, it can affect the entire body. A common disability that results from stroke is complete paralysis on one side of the body, called hemiplegia. A related disability that is not as debilitating as paralysis is one-sided weakness or hemiparesis. Stroke may cause problems with thinking, awareness, attention, learning, judgment, and memory. Stroke survivors often have problems understanding or forming speech. A stroke can lead to emotional problems. Stroke patients may have difficulty controlling their emotions or may express inappropriate emotions. Many stroke patients experience depression. Stroke survivors may also have numbness or strange sensations. The pain is often worse in the hands and feet and is made worse by movement and temperature changes, especially cold temperatures.
                
Recurrent stroke is frequent; about 25 percent of people who recover from their first stroke will have another stroke within 5 years.
Diabetes is a disorder of metabolismthe way our bodies use digested food for energy. Most of the food we eat is broken down into glucose, the form of sugar in the blood. Glucose is the body's main source of fuel.
                
After digestion, glucose enters the bloodstream. Then glucose goes to cells throughout the body where it is used for energy. However, a hormone called insulin must be present to allow glucose to enter the cells. Insulin is a hormone produced by the pancreas, a large gland behind the stomach.
                
In people who do not have diabetes, the pancreas automatically produces the right amount of insulin to move glucose from blood into the cells. However, diabetes develops when the pancreas does not make enough insulin, or the cells in the muscles, liver, and fat do not use insulin properly, or both. As a result, the amount of glucose in the blood increases while the cells are starved of energy.
                
Over time, high blood glucose levels damage nerves and blood vessels, leading to complications such as heart disease and stroke, the leading causes of death among people with diabetes. Uncontrolled diabetes can eventually lead to other health problems as well, such as vision loss, kidney failure, and amputations.
Diabetes itself is a risk factor for heart disease and stroke. Also, many people with diabetes have other conditions that increase their chance of developing heart disease and stroke. These conditions are called risk factors. One risk factor for heart disease and stroke is having a family history of heart disease. If one or more members of your family had a heart attack at an early age (before age 55 for men or 65 for women), you may be at increased risk.
                
You can't change whether heart disease runs in your family, but you can take steps to control the other risk factors for heart disease listed here:
                
- Having central obesity. Central obesity means carrying extra weight around the waist, as opposed to the hips. A waist measurement of more than 40 inches for men and more than 35 inches for women means you have central obesity. Your risk of heart disease is higher because abdominal fat can increase the production of LDL (bad) cholesterol, the type of blood fat that can be deposited on the inside of blood vessel walls.  - Having abnormal blood fat (cholesterol) levels.      - LDL cholesterol can build up inside your blood vessels, leading to narrowing and hardening of your arteriesthe blood vessels that carry blood from the heart to the rest of the body. Arteries can then become blocked. Therefore, high levels of LDL cholesterol raise your risk of getting heart disease.    - Triglycerides are another type of blood fat that can raise your risk of heart disease when the levels are high.    - HDL (good) cholesterol removes deposits from inside your blood vessels and takes them to the liver for removal. Low levels of HDL cholesterol increase your risk for heart disease.    - Having high blood pressure. If you have high blood pressure, also called hypertension, your heart must work harder to pump blood. High blood pressure can strain the heart, damage blood vessels, and increase your risk of heart attack, stroke, eye problems, and kidney problems.  - Smoking. Smoking doubles your risk of getting heart disease. Stopping smoking is especially important for people with diabetes because both smoking and diabetes narrow blood vessels. Smoking also increases the risk of other long-term complications, such as eye problems. In addition, smoking can damage the blood vessels in your legs and increase the risk of amputation.
Even if you are at high risk for heart disease and stroke, you can help keep your heart and blood vessels healthy. You can do so by taking the following steps:
                
- Make sure that your diet is "heart-healthy." Meet with a registered dietitian to plan a diet that meets these goals:      - Include at least 14 grams of fiber daily for every 1,000 calories consumed. Foods high in fiber may help lower blood cholesterol. Oat bran, oatmeal, whole-grain breads and cereals, dried beans and peas (such as kidney beans, pinto beans, and black-eyed peas), fruits, and vegetables are all good sources of fiber. Increase the amount of fiber in your diet gradually to avoid digestive problems.    - Cut down on saturated fat. It raises your blood cholesterol level. Saturated fat is found in meats, poultry skin, butter, dairy products with fat, shortening, lard, and tropical oils such as palm and coconut oil. Your dietitian can figure out how many grams of saturated fat should be your daily maximum amount.    - Keep the cholesterol in your diet to less than 300 milligrams a day. Cholesterol is found in meat, dairy products, and eggs.    - Keep the amount of trans fat in your diet to a minimum. It's a type of fat in foods that raises blood cholesterol. Limit your intake of crackers, cookies, snack foods, commercially prepared baked goods, cake mixes, microwave popcorn, fried foods, salad dressings, and other foods made with partially hydrogenated oil. In addition, some kinds of vegetable shortening and margarines have trans fat. Check for trans fat in the Nutrition Facts section on the food package.    - If you smoke, quit. Your doctor can help you find ways to quit smoking.  - Ask your doctor whether you should take aspirin. Studies have shown that taking a low dose of aspirin every day can help reduce the risk of heart disease and stroke. However, aspirin is not safe for everyone. Your doctor can tell you whether taking aspirin is right for you and exactly how much to take.  - Get prompt treatment for transient ischemic attacks (TIAs). Early treatment for TIAs, sometimes called mini-strokes, may help prevent or delay a future stroke. Signs of a TIA are sudden weakness, loss of balance, numbness, confusion, blindness in one or both eyes, double vision, difficulty speaking, or a severe headache.
You can keep track of the ABCs of diabetes to make sure your treatment is working. Talk with your health care provider about the best targets for you.
                
A stands for A1C (a test that measures blood glucose control). Have an A1C test at least twice a year. It shows your average blood glucose level over the past 3 months. Talk with your doctor about whether you should check your blood glucose at home and how to do it.
                
A1C target        Below 7 percent, unless your doctor sets a different target
                

                
Blood glucose targets        Before meals    90 to 130 mg/dL        1 to 2 hours after the start of a meal    Less than 180 mg/dL
                
B is for blood pressure. Have it checked at every office visit.
                
Blood pressure target        Below 140/80 mm Hg, unless your doctor sets a different target
                
C is for cholesterol. Have it checked at least once a year.
                
Blood fat (cholesterol) targets        LDL (bad) cholesterol    Under 100 mg/dL        Triglycerides    Under 150 mg/dL        HDL (good) cholesterol For men: above 40 mg/dL For women: above 50 mg/dL
                
Control of the ABCs of diabetes can reduce your risk for heart disease and stroke. If your blood glucose, blood pressure, and cholesterol levels aren't on target, ask your doctor what changes in diet, activity, and medications can help you reach these goals.
- If you have diabetes, you are at least twice as likely as other people to have heart disease or a stroke.  - Controlling the ABCs of diabetesA1C (blood glucose), blood pressure, and cholesterol-can cut your risk of heart disease and stroke.  - Choosing foods wisely, quitting smoking, and taking medications (if needed) can all help lower your risk of heart disease and stroke.  - If you have any warning signs of a heart attack or a stroke, get medical care immediatelydon't delay. Early treatment of heart attack and stroke in a hospital emergency room can reduce damage to the heart and the brain.