Surfactant dysfunction is a lung disorder that causes breathing problems. This condition results from abnormalities in the composition or function of surfactant, a mixture of certain fats (called phospholipids) and proteins that lines the lung tissue and makes breathing easy. Without normal surfactant, the tissue surrounding the air sacs in the lungs (the alveoli) sticks together (because of a force called surface tension) after exhalation, causing the alveoli to collapse. As a result, filling the lungs with air on each breath becomes very difficult, and the delivery of oxygen to the body is impaired.  The signs and symptoms of surfactant dysfunction can vary in severity. The most severe form of this condition causes respiratory distress syndrome in newborns. Affected babies have extreme difficulty breathing and are unable to get enough oxygen. The lack of oxygen can damage the baby's brain and other organs. This syndrome leads to respiratory failure, and most babies with this form of the condition do not survive more than a few months.  Less severe forms of surfactant dysfunction cause gradual onset of breathing problems in children or adults. Signs and symptoms of these milder forms are abnormally rapid breathing (tachypnea); low concentrations of oxygen in the blood (hypoxemia); and an inability to grow or gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive).  There are several types of surfactant dysfunction, which are identified by the genetic cause of the condition. One type, called SP-B deficiency, causes respiratory distress syndrome in newborns. Other types, known as SP-C dysfunction and ABCA3 deficiency, have signs and symptoms that range from mild to severe.
One type of surfactant dysfunction, SP-B deficiency, is estimated to occur in 1 in 1 million newborns worldwide. The prevalence of surfactant dysfunction due to other causes is unknown.
Surfactant dysfunction can have different inheritance patterns depending on its genetic cause.  When caused by mutations in the SFTPB or ABCA3 gene, this condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.  When caused by mutations in the SFTPC gene, this condition has an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In about half of cases caused by changes in the SFTPC gene, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. The remainder result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of surfactant dysfunction:  - Children's Interstitial and Diffuse Lung Disease (chILD) Foundation: Surfactant Deficiency  - Genetic Testing Registry: Surfactant metabolism dysfunction, pulmonary, 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Surfactant metabolism dysfunction, pulmonary, 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Surfactant metabolism dysfunction, pulmonary, 4  - Genetic Testing Registry: Surfactant metabolism dysfunction, pulmonary, 5  - National Heart Lung and Blood Institute: How is Respiratory Distress Syndrome Diagnosed?  - National Heart Lung and Blood Institute: How is Respiratory Distress Syndrome Treated?   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care