Swyer syndrome is a condition that affects sexual development. Sexual development is usually determined by an individual's chromosomes; however, in Swyer syndrome, sexual development does not match the affected individual's chromosomal makeup.  People usually have 46 chromosomes in each cell. Two of the 46 chromosomes, known as X and Y, are called sex chromosomes because they help determine whether a person will develop male or female sex characteristics. Girls and women typically have two X chromosomes (46,XX karyotype), while boys and men usually have one X chromosome and one Y chromosome (46,XY karyotype). In Swyer syndrome, individuals with one X chromosome and one Y chromosome in each cell, the pattern typically found in boys and men, have female reproductive structures.  People with Swyer syndrome have typical female external genitalia. The uterus and fallopian tubes are normally-formed, but the gonads (ovaries or testes) are not functional; affected individuals have undeveloped clumps of tissue called streak gonads. Because of the lack of development of the gonads, Swyer syndrome is also called 46,XY complete gonadal dysgenesis. The residual gonadal tissue often becomes cancerous, so it is usually removed surgically early in life.  People with Swyer syndrome are typically raised as girls and have a female gender identity. Because they do not have functional ovaries, affected individuals usually begin hormone replacement therapy during adolescence to induce menstruation and development of female secondary sex characteristics such as breast enlargement and uterine growth. Hormone replacement therapy also helps reduce the risk of reduced bone density (osteopenia and osteoporosis). Women with this disorder do not produce eggs (ova), but they may be able to become pregnant with a donated egg or embryo.  Swyer syndrome usually affects only sexual development; such cases are called isolated Swyer syndrome. However, depending on the genetic cause, Swyer syndrome may also occur along with health conditions such as nerve problems (neuropathy) or as part of a syndrome such as campomelic dysplasia, which causes severe skeletal abnormalities.
Swyer syndrome occurs in approximately 1 in 80,000 people.
Most cases of Swyer syndrome are not inherited; they occur in people with no history of the condition in their family. These cases result either from nongenetic causes or from new (de novo) mutations in a gene that occur during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) or in early embryonic development.  SRY-related Swyer syndrome is usually caused by a new mutation. However, some individuals with Swyer syndrome inherit an altered SRY gene from an unaffected father who is mosaic for the mutation. Mosaic means that an individual has the mutation in some cells (including some reproductive cells) but not in others. In rare cases, a father may carry the mutation in every cell of the body but also has other genetic variations that prevent him from being affected by the condition. Because the SRY gene is on the Y chromosome, Swyer syndrome caused by SRY gene mutations is described as having a Y-linked inheritance pattern.  When Swyer syndrome is associated with an MAP3K1 or NR5A1 gene mutation, the condition is also usually caused by a new mutation. In the rare inherited cases, the mutation may be inherited from either parent, since these genes are not on the Y chromosome. In these cases, the condition has an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition.  Swyer syndrome caused by mutations in the DHH gene is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition are carriers of one copy of the altered gene. Female carriers of a DHH gene mutation generally have typical sex development. Male carriers of a DHH gene mutation may also be unaffected, or they may have genital differences such as the urethra opening on the underside of the penis (hypospadias).
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Swyer syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: 46,XY Disorder of Sex Development and 46,XY Complete Gonadal Dysgenesis  - Genetic Testing Registry: Pure gonadal dysgenesis 46,XY  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Intersex  - University College London Hospitals: Disorders of Sexual Development   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care