Spondylocarpotarsal synostosis (SCT) syndrome is an inherited syndrome characterized by disproportionate short stature, abnormalities of the vertebrae in the spine, scoliosis and lordosis, carpal and tarsal fusion (fusion of the bones in the hands and feet), clubfoot, and facial abnormalities such as round face, large forehead, and up-turned nostrils. Other features can include cleft palate, deafness, loose joints, and poor formation of tooth enamel. SCT syndrome has been associated with retinal anomalies and cataracts. However, these eye problems are usually not severe enough to impair vision. This condition is caused by mutations in the FLNB gene. It is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner in families, which means that parents are usually unaffected and children have to have inherited a gene mutation from each parent.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal form of the vertebral bodies 90% Hyperlordosis 90% Limitation of joint mobility 90% Short thorax 90% Synostosis of carpal bones 90% Vertebral segmentation defect 90% Cleft palate 7.5% Conductive hearing impairment 7.5% Pectus excavatum 7.5% Polycystic kidney dysplasia 7.5% Sensorineural hearing impairment 7.5% Abnormality of pelvic girdle bone morphology - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Block vertebrae - Broad face - Broad nasal tip - C2-C3 subluxation - Carpal synostosis - Cataract - Clinodactyly of the 5th finger - Delayed skeletal maturation - Disproportionate short-trunk short stature - Epiphyseal dysplasia - Hypertelorism - Hypoplasia of dental enamel - Hypoplasia of the odontoid process - Mixed hearing impairment - Pes planus - Preauricular skin tag - Rarefaction of retinal pigmentation - Renal cyst - Restrictive lung disease - Scoliosis - Short neck - Short nose - Tarsal synostosis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome is a disorder that affects the development of bones throughout the body. Newborns with this disorder are of approximately normal length, but impaired growth of the trunk results in short stature over time. The bones of the spine (vertebrae) are misshapen and abnormally joined together (fused). The vertebral abnormalities may result in an abnormally curved lower back (lordosis) and a spine that curves to the side (scoliosis).  Affected individuals also have abnormalities of the wrist (carpal) and ankle (tarsal) bones and inward- and upward-turning feet (clubfeet). Characteristic facial features include a round face, a large forehead (frontal bossing), and nostrils that open to the front rather than downward (anteverted nares).  Some people with spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome have an opening in the roof of the mouth (a cleft palate), hearing loss, thin tooth enamel, flat feet, or an unusually large range of joint movement (hypermobility). Individuals with this disorder can survive into adulthood. Intelligence is generally unaffected, although mild developmental delay has been reported in some affected individuals.
Spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome is a rare disorder; its prevalence is unknown. At least 25 affected individuals have been identified.
Mutations in the FLNB gene cause spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome. The FLNB gene provides instructions for making a protein called filamin B. This protein helps build the network of protein filaments (cytoskeleton) that gives structure to cells and allows them to change shape and move. Filamin B attaches (binds) to another protein called actin and helps the actin to form the branching network of filaments that makes up the cytoskeleton. It also links actin to many other proteins to perform various functions within the cell, including the cell signaling that helps determine how the cytoskeleton will change as tissues grow and take shape during development.  Filamin B is especially important in the development of the skeleton before birth. It is active (expressed) in the cell membranes of cartilage-forming cells (chondrocytes). Cartilage is a tough, flexible tissue that makes up much of the skeleton during early development. Most cartilage is later converted to bone (a process called ossification), except for the cartilage that continues to cover and protect the ends of bones and is present in the nose, airways (trachea and bronchi), and external ears. Filamin B appears to be important for normal cell growth and division (proliferation) and maturation (differentiation) of chondrocytes and for the ossification of cartilage.  FLNB gene mutations that cause spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome result in the production of an abnormally short filamin B protein that is unstable and breaks down rapidly. Loss of the filamin B protein appears to result in out-of-place (ectopic) ossification, resulting in fusion of the bones in the spine, wrists, and ankles and other signs and symptoms of spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome.  A few individuals who have been diagnosed with spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome do not have mutations in the FLNB gene. In these cases, the genetic cause of the disorder is unknown.
Spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome caused by FLNB gene mutations is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.  In a few individuals with signs and symptoms similar to those of spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome but without FLNB gene mutations, the condition appears to have been inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. Autosomal dominant means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: FLNB-Related Disorders  - Genetic Testing Registry: Spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care