The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Synovial chondromatosis, familial with dwarfism. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Arthralgia - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Severe short stature - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Synovial chondromatosis is a type of non-cancerous tumor that arises in the lining of a joint. The knee is most commonly affected, however it can affect any joint. The tumors begin as small nodules of cartilage. These nodules can separate and become loose within the joint. Some tumors may be no larger than a grain of rice. Synovial chondromatosis most commonly occurs in adults ages 20 to 50. Signs and symptoms may include pain, swelling, a decreased range of motion, and locking of the joint. The exact underlying cause of the condition is unknown. Treatment may involve surgery to remove the tumor. Recurrence of the condition is common.
 The exact underlying cause of synovial chondromatosis is unknown. Some research suggests that trauma may play a role in its development because the condition primarily occurs in weight-bearing joints. Infection has also been considered as a contributing factor. The condition is not inherited. Synovial chondromatosis can reportedly occur as either a primary or secondary form. Primary synovial chondromatosis, which is more rare, occurs spontaneously and does not appear to relate to any pre-existing conditions. Secondary synovial chondromatosis is the more common form and often occurs when there is pre-existent osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, osteonecrosis, osteochondritis dissecans, neuropathic osteoarthropathy (which often occurs in diabetic individuals), tuberculosis, or osteochondral fractures (torn cartilage covering the end of a bone in a joint) in the affected individual.