Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I deficiency is type of urea cycle disorder. It causes toxic levels of ammonia to accumulate in the blood. Signs and symptoms in newborns may include a lack of energy, unwillingness to eat, seizures, unusual body movements, and poorly controlled breathing or body temperature. Complications may include coma, developmental delay, and learning disability. Some individuals have a less severe form of the deficiency, and have milder symptoms that may not appear until later in life. Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I deficiency is caused by mutations in the CPS1 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase 1 deficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Aminoaciduria 90% Hyperammonemia 90% Muscular hypotonia 90% Respiratory insufficiency 90% Seizures 90% Stroke 5% Ataxia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cerebral edema - Coma - Episodic ammonia intoxication - Failure to thrive - Hypoargininemia - Intellectual disability - Irritability - Lethargy - Low plasma citrulline - Protein avoidance - Respiratory alkalosis - Vomiting - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I deficiency is an inherited disorder that causes ammonia to accumulate in the blood (hyperammonemia). Ammonia, which is formed when proteins are broken down in the body, is toxic if the levels become too high. The brain is especially sensitive to the effects of excess ammonia.  In the first few days of life, infants with carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I deficiency typically exhibit the effects of hyperammonemia, which may include unusual sleepiness, poorly regulated breathing rate or body temperature, unwillingness to feed, vomiting after feeding, unusual body movements, seizures, or coma. Affected individuals who survive the newborn period may experience recurrence of these symptoms if diet is not carefully managed or if they experience infections or other stressors. They may also have delayed development and intellectual disability.  In some people with carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I deficiency, signs and symptoms may be less severe and appear later in life.
Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I deficiency is a rare disorder; its overall incidence is unknown. Researchers in Japan have estimated that it occurs in 1 in 800,000 newborns in that country.
Mutations in the CPS1 gene cause carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I deficiency. The CPS1 gene provides instructions for making the enzyme carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I. This enzyme participates in the urea cycle, which is a sequence of biochemical reactions that occurs in liver cells. The urea cycle processes excess nitrogen, generated when protein is broken down by the body, to make a compound called urea that is excreted by the kidneys. The specific role of the carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I enzyme is to control the first step of the urea cycle, a reaction in which excess nitrogen compounds are incorporated into the cycle to be processed.  Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I deficiency belongs to a class of genetic diseases called urea cycle disorders. In this condition, the carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I enzyme is at low levels (deficient) or absent, and the urea cycle cannot proceed normally. As a result, nitrogen accumulates in the bloodstream in the form of toxic ammonia instead of being converted to less toxic urea and excreted. Ammonia is especially damaging to the brain, and excess ammonia causes neurological problems and other signs and symptoms of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I deficiency.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I deficiency:  - Baby's First Test  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Urea Cycle Disorders Overview  - Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital hyperammonemia, type I  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Hereditary Urea Cycle Abnormality   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care