For unknown reasons, in industrialized Western countries SLE has become 10 times more common over the past 50 years. While estimates of its prevalence vary, SLE is believed to affect 14.6 to 68 per 100,000 people in the United States, with females developing SLE more often than males. It is most common in younger women; however, 20 percent of SLE cases occur in people over age 50. Because many of the signs and symptoms of SLE resemble those of other disorders, diagnosis may be delayed for years, and the condition may never be diagnosed in some affected individuals.  In industrialized Western countries, people of African and Asian descent are two to four times more likely to develop SLE than are people of European descent. However, while the prevalence of SLE in Africa and Asia is unknown, it is believed to be much lower than in Western nations. Researchers suggest that factors such as ethnic mixing, tobacco use in industrialized countries, and the different types of infections people acquire in different regions may help account for the discrepancy. For example malaria, which occurs often in tropical regions, is thought to be protective against SLE, while the Epstein-Barr virus, more common in the West, increases SLE risk.
Normal variations (polymorphisms) in many genes can affect the risk of developing SLE, and in most cases multiple genetic factors are thought to be involved. In rare cases, SLE is caused by mutations in single genes. Most of the genes associated with SLE are involved in immune system function, and variations in these genes likely affect proper targeting and control of the immune response. Sex hormones and a variety of environmental factors including viral infections, diet, stress, chemical exposures, and sunlight are also thought to play a role in triggering this complex disorder. About 10 percent of SLE cases are thought to be triggered by drug exposure, and more than 80 drugs that may be involved have been identified.  In people with SLE, cells that have undergone self-destruction (apoptosis) because they are damaged or no longer needed are not cleared away properly. The relationship of this loss of function to the cause or features of SLE is unclear. Researchers suggest that these dead cells may release substances that cause the immune system to react inappropriately and attack the body's tissues, resulting in the signs and symptoms of SLE.
SLE and other autoimmune disorders tend to run in families, but the inheritance pattern is usually unknown. People may inherit a gene variation that increases or decreases the risk of SLE, but in most cases do not inherit the condition itself. Not all people with SLE have a gene variation that increases the risk, and not all people with such a gene variation will develop the disorder.  In rare cases, SLE can be inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of systemic lupus erythematosus:  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Antinuclear Antibody Panel   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care