Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) is a genetic disorder that causes an abnormally fast and irregular heart rhythm in response to physical activity or emotional stress. Signs and symptoms include light-headedness, dizziness, and fainting. Symptoms most often develop between 7 to 9 years of age.  If untreated CPVT can cause a heart attack and death. CPVT is caused by mutations in the RYR2 or CASQ2 genes. When a RYR2 gene mutation is involved, the condition is passed through families in an autosomal dominant fashion. When CASQ2 gene mutations are involved, the condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion. In some cases the underlying cause can not be determined. Beta blockers are used to treat CPVT.  An Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillator (ICD) may also be needed.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Vertigo 50% Sudden cardiac death 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Seizures - Sudden death - Syncope - Ventricular tachycardia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 It has been recommended that all people clinically diagnosed with catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) receive treatment. Some individuals who have never had or demonstrated symptoms of CPVT, for example asymptomatic family members with CASQ2 gene mutations, may still benefit from treatment. We recommend that you speak with your healthcare provider regarding your treatment options.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Familial ventricular tachycardia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of metabolism/homeostasis - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia - Sudden cardiac death - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) is a condition characterized by an abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia). As the heart rate increases in response to physical activity or emotional stress, it can trigger an abnormally fast and irregular heartbeat called ventricular tachycardia. Episodes of ventricular tachycardia can cause light-headedness, dizziness, and fainting (syncope). In people with CPVT, these episodes typically begin in childhood.  If CPVT is not recognized and treated, an episode of ventricular tachycardia may cause the heart to stop beating (cardiac arrest), leading to sudden death. Researchers suspect that CPVT may be a significant cause of sudden death in children and young adults without recognized heart abnormalities.
The prevalence of CPVT is estimated to be about 1 in 10,000 people. However, the true prevalence of this condition is unknown.
CPVT can result from mutations in two genes, RYR2 and CASQ2. RYR2 gene mutations cause about half of all cases, while mutations in the CASQ2 gene account for 1 percent to 2 percent of cases. In people without an identified mutation in one of these genes, the genetic cause of the disorder is unknown.  The RYR2 and CASQ2 genes provide instructions for making proteins that help maintain a regular heartbeat. For the heart to beat normally, heart muscle cells called myocytes must tense (contract) and relax in a coordinated way. Both the RYR2 and CASQ2 proteins are involved in handling calcium within myocytes, which is critical for the regular contraction of these cells.  Mutations in either the RYR2 or CASQ2 gene disrupt the handling of calcium within myocytes. During exercise or emotional stress, impaired calcium regulation in the heart can lead to ventricular tachycardia in people with CPVT.
When CPVT results from mutations in the RYR2 gene, it has an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. Autosomal dominant inheritance means that one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In about half of cases, an affected person inherits an RYR2 gene mutation from one affected parent. The remaining cases result from new mutations in the RYR2 gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.  When CPVT is caused by mutations in the CASQ2 gene, the condition has an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. Autosomal recessive inheritance means that both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia:  - Cleveland Clinic: Management of Arrhythmias  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Ventricular tachycardia, catecholaminergic polymorphic, 2  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Fainting  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Ventricular Tachycardia   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care