TARP syndrome is a rare condition affecting males that causes several birth defects. TARP stands for Talipes equinovarus, Atrial septal defect, Robin sequence, and Persistent left superior vena cava. Those with TARP syndrome have clubfoot deformity (talipes equinovarus) and congenital heart defects involving failure of the upper heart chambers to close (atrial septal defect). The Robin sequence (also known as Pierre Robins sequence) is characterized by a small lower jaw at birth that prevents proper feeding of the infant, followed by a retracted or displaced tongue. A high-arched, cleft soft palate is also commonly seen. Affected individuals also have persistent left superior vena cava. TARP syndrome has been reported to cause death before birth or soon after birth. This condition is caused by mutations in the RBM10 gene and is inherited in an X-linked recessive fashion.
 TARP syndrome is a genetic condition caused by mutations in the RBM10 gene, which is located on the X chromosome. There is little information available about how mutations in this gene specifically cause TARP syndrome. However, in 2010 researchers showed that the RBM10 gene is expressed in mouse embryos in the branchial arches (embryonic structures that give rise to parts of the head and neck) and limbs, which is consistent with body parts known to be affected in individuals with TARP syndrome. The signs and symptoms of TARP syndrome occur when this gene does not function correctly.
How  TARP syndrome is inherited in an X-linked recessive manner. This means that the mutated gene responsible for TARP syndrome (RBM10) is located on the X chromosome, and typically only affects males. Males have one X chromosome and one Y chromosome, while females have two X chromosomes. If a female has one mutated copy of RBM10 and one normal copy, she would typically be an unaffected carrier of this condition. Occasionally, female carriers of an X-linked recessive condition may have varying degrees of signs or symptoms of the condition; this is due to differences in X chromosome inactivation. When a female carrier of an X-linked condition has children, each daughter has a 50% (1 in 2) risk to also be a carrier, and a 50% risk to not be a carrier (and have 2 normal copies of the gene). Each son has a 50% risk to be affected and a 50% risk to be unaffected.
 Yes, genetic testing (including carrier testing) is available for TARP syndrome. The Genetic Testing Registry (GTR) provides information about the labs that offer genetic testing for this condition. On the GTR Web site, click on the title "Test for TARP syndrome" to find out more information about each test. The intended audience for the GTR is health care providers and researchers. Therefore, patients and consumers with specific questions about a genetic test should contact a health care provider or a genetics professional.