Taste is the ability to detect different sensations in the mouth, such as sweet or salty. It is part of your body's chemical sensing system. Taste combines with other oral sensations, such as texture, spiciness, temperature, and aroma to produce what is commonly referred to as flavor.
Roughly 200,000 people each year visit a doctor for a chemosensory problem such as a taste disorder. Many more taste disorders go unreported.
The most common causes of taste disorders are medications, infections, head trauma, and dental problems. Most people who have a problem with taste are taking certain medications or they have had a head or neck injury. Gum disease, dry mouth, and dentures can contribute to taste problems, too. Other causes are radiation therapy for head and neck cancers, smoking, and some surgeries.
Problems with taste that occur with aging cannot be prevented. However you may be able to protect yourself against other causes of taste loss with these steps. - Prevent upper respiratory infections such as colds and the flu. Wash your hands frequently, especially during the winter months, and get a flu shot every year.   - Avoid Head Injuries. Always wear seatbelts when riding in a car and a helmet when bicycling.   - Avoid Exposure to Toxic Chemicals. Avoid contact with chemicals that might cause smell problems such as paints, insecticides, and solvents, or wear a respirator if you cannot avoid contact.   - Review Your Medications. If you are taking antibiotics or antihistamines or other medications and notice a change in your sense of taste, talk to your doctor. You may be able to adjust or change your medicine to one that will not cause a problem with taste. Do not stop taking your medications unless directed by your doctor.   - Dont Smoke. It can impair the sense of taste. For free help to quit smoking, visit Smokefree.gov  Prevent upper respiratory infections such as colds and the flu. Wash your hands frequently, especially during the winter months, and get a flu shot every year. Avoid Head Injuries. Always wear seatbelts when riding in a car and a helmet when bicycling. Avoid Exposure to Toxic Chemicals. Avoid contact with chemicals that might cause smell problems such as paints, insecticides, and solvents, or wear a respirator if you cannot avoid contact. Review Your Medications. If you are taking antibiotics or antihistamines or other medications and notice a change in your sense of taste, talk to your doctor. You may be able to adjust or change your medicine to one that will not cause a problem with taste. Do not stop taking your medications unless directed by your doctor. Dont Smoke. It can impair the sense of taste. For free help to quit smoking, visit Smokefree.gov
Doctors can diagnose a taste disorder by measuring the lowest concentration of a substance that a person can detect. The doctor may also ask a patient to compare the tastes of different substances or to note how the intensity of a taste grows when a substance's concentration is increased. Scientists have developed taste tests in which a person responds to different concentrations of a substance. This may involve a simple "sip, spit, and rinse" test, or the application of a substance directly to the tongue with an eye dropper. By using these tests, your doctor can determine if you have a true taste disorder and what type it is.
Depending on the cause of your taste disorder, your doctor may be able to treat your problem or suggest ways to cope with it. If a certain medication is the cause of the problem, your doctor may be able to adjust or change your medicine. Your doctor will work with you to get the medicine you need while trying to reduce unwanted side effects. Some patients with respiratory infections regain their sense of taste when the illness is over. Often, correcting a general medical problem can restore the sense of taste. Occasionally, the sense of taste returns to normal on its own without any treatment.
The National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders (NIDCD) supports basic and clinical investigations of smell and taste disorders at its laboratories in Bethesda, Md. and at universities and chemosensory research centers across the country. These chemosensory scientists are exploring how to - prevent the effects of aging on taste and smell   - develop new diagnostic tests   - understand associations between taste disorders and changes in diet and food preferences in the elderly or among people with chronic illnesses  - improve treatment methods and rehabilitation strategies.  prevent the effects of aging on taste and smell develop new diagnostic tests understand associations between taste disorders and changes in diet and food preferences in the elderly or among people with chronic illnesses improve treatment methods and rehabilitation strategies.