Tetrasomy X is a chromosome disorder that only affects females and is caused by having four copies of the X chromosome instead of two. Females with tetrasomy X have a total of 48 chromosomes in their cells, so this condition is sometimes written as 48, XXXX. The signs and symptoms of tetrasomy X vary, but can include mild to moderate speech and learning difficulties; developmental delay; distinctive facial features; dental abnormalities; hypotonia and joint laxity; radioulnar synostosis; heart defects; hip dysplasia; and problems with ovarian function. An increased risk of childhood infections has also been reported. Tetrasomy X is caused by a random error that occurs during the development of an egg cell and is not caused by anything a mother does during her pregnancy.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Tetrasomy X. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of chromosome segregation 90% Abnormality of the teeth 50% Cognitive impairment 50% Epicanthus 50% Hypertelorism 50% Joint hypermobility 50% Muscular hypotonia 50% Radioulnar synostosis 50% Strabismus 50% Upslanted palpebral fissure 50% Abnormality of immune system physiology 7.5% Abnormality of the hip bone 7.5% Brachydactyly syndrome 7.5% Clinodactyly of the 5th finger 7.5% Secondary amenorrhea 7.5% The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Tetrasomy X is usually caused by a random error in the formation of an egg cell (before pregnancy). In some cases, it may be due to inheriting three X chromosomes from the mother and one X chromosome from the father. In other cases, it may be due to inheriting all four X chromosomes from the mother. During the normal formation of egg cells, each egg cell contains one X chromosome to pass on to offspring. However, errors in cell division can cause an egg cell to have three or four X chromosomes, instead of one. If an egg cell with the extra X chromosomes is fertilized by a sperm cell with one X chromosome, the resulting embryo will have these extra chromosomes. Rarely, tetrasomy X may be caused by an error in cell division that occurs after an egg is fertilized, or by the presence of extra X chromosomes in some of the mother's cells.
Tetrasomy 18p is a chromosomal condition that affects many parts of the body. This condition usually causes feeding difficulties in infancy, delayed development, intellectual disability that is often mild to moderate but can be severe, changes in muscle tone, distinctive facial features, and other birth defects. However, the signs and symptoms vary among affected individuals.  Babies with tetrasomy 18p often have trouble feeding and may vomit frequently, which makes it difficult for them to gain weight. Some affected infants also have breathing problems and jaundice, which is a yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes.  Changes in muscle tone are commonly seen with tetrasomy 18p. Some affected children have weak muscle tone (hypotonia), while others have increased muscle tone (hypertonia) and stiffness (spasticity). These changes contribute to delayed development of motor skills, including sitting, crawling, and walking.  Tetrasomy 18p is associated with a distinctive facial appearance that can include unusually shaped and low-set ears, a small mouth, a flat area between the upper lip and the nose (philtrum), and a thin upper lip. Many affected individuals also have a high, arched roof of the mouth (palate), and a few have had a split in the roof of the mouth (cleft palate).  Additional features of tetrasomy 18p can include seizures, vision problems, recurrent ear infections, mild to moderate hearing loss, constipation and other gastrointestinal problems, abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis or kyphosis), a shortage of growth hormone, and birth defects affecting the heart and other organs. Males with tetrasomy 18p may be born with undescended testes (cryptorchidism) or the opening of the urethra on the underside of the penis (hypospadias). Psychiatric conditions, such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and anxiety, as well as social and behavioral challenges have also been reported in some people with tetrasomy 18p.
Tetrasomy 18p is a rare disorder. It is known to affect about 250 families worldwide.
Tetrasomy 18p results from the presence of an abnormal extra chromosome, called an isochromosome 18p, in each cell. An isochromosome is a chromosome with two identical arms. Normal chromosomes have one long (q) arm and one short (p) arm, but isochromosomes have either two q arms or two p arms. Isochromosome 18p is a version of chromosome 18 made up of two p arms.  Cells normally have two copies of each chromosome, one inherited from each parent. In people with tetrasomy 18p, cells have the usual two copies of chromosome 18 plus an isochromosome 18p. As a result, each cell has four copies of the short arm of chromosome 18. (The word "tetrasomy" is derived from "tetra," the Greek word for "four.") The extra genetic material from the isochromosome disrupts the normal course of development, causing the characteristic features of this disorder.
Tetrasomy 18p is usually not inherited. The chromosomal change responsible for the disorder typically occurs as a random event during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) in a parent of the affected individual, usually the mother. Most affected individuals have no history of the disorder in their family. However, rare inherited cases of tetrasomy 18p have been reported.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of tetrasomy 18p:  - Chromosome 18 Clinical Research Center, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio  - Genetic Testing Registry: Chromosome 18, tetrasomy 18p   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care