Thalassemias are inherited blood disorders. If you have one, your body makes fewer healthy red blood cells and less hemoglobin. Hemoglobin is a protein that carries oxygen to the body. That leads to anemia. Thalassemias occur most often among people of Italian, Greek, Middle Eastern, Southern Asian, and African descent.    Thalassemias can be mild or severe. Some people have no symptoms or mild anemia. The most common severe type in the United States is called Cooley's anemia. It usually appears during the first two years of life. People with it may have severe anemia, slowed growth and delayed puberty, and problems with the spleen, liver, heart, or bones.    Doctors diagnose thalassemias using blood tests. Treatments include blood transfusions and treatment to remove excess iron from the body. If you have mild symptoms or no symptoms, you may not need treatment. In some severe cases, you may need a bone marrow transplant.    NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
 The signs and symptoms vary depending on the severity of the thalassemia. For example, people affected by milder forms of thalassemia can develop mild anemia or may have no signs or symptoms of the condition at all. Intermediate forms of thalassemia can cause mild to moderate anemia and may be associated with other health problems such as slowed growth, delayed puberty, bone problems and/or an enlarged spleen. In addition to the signs and symptoms seen in intermediate thalassemia, people with severe forms of thalassemia may also experience severe anemia, poor appetite, paleness, dark urine, yellow discoloration of skin (jaundice), and enlarged liver or heart. For more information on the signs and symptoms by type of thalassemia, please click here. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Thalassemia. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the heme biosynthetic pathway 90% Abnormality of immune system physiology 7.5% Biliary tract abnormality 7.5% Cognitive impairment 7.5% Hemolytic anemia 7.5% Hydrops fetalis 7.5% Hypersplenism 7.5% Myelodysplasia 7.5% Splenomegaly 7.5% Hypochromic microcytic anemia - Reduced alpha/beta synthesis ratio - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 There are two main types of thalassemia, alpha thalassemia and beta thalassemia, which each affect a different part of hemoglobin (the protein in red blood cells that carries oxygen). Hemoglobin is made up of two different components (subunits): beta globin and alpha globin. The HBB gene provides instructions for making beta globin, while the HBA1 and HBA2 genes provide instructions for making alpha globin. Each person has two copies of each of these genes, one inherited from the mother and one from the father. Changes (mutations) in the HBB gene lead to reduced levels of beta globin and cause beta thalassemia. Loss (deletion) of some or all of the HBA1 and/or HBA2 genes results in a shortage of alpha globin, leading to alpha thalassemia.
How  In general, thalassemia is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner; however, the inheritance can be quite complex as multiple genes can influence the production of hemoglobin. Most people affected by beta thalassemia have mutations in both copies of the HBB gene in each cell. The parents of an affected person usually each carry one mutated copy of the gene and are referred to as carriers. Carriers typically do not show signs or symptoms of the condition; although some carriers of beta thalassemia develop mild anemia. When two carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be a carrier like each of the parents, and a 25% chance to not have the condition and not be a carrier. The inheritance of alpha thalassemia is complicated by the fact that mutations in two different genes (HBA1 and HBA2) are associated with the condition. People have two copies of the HBA1 gene and two copies of the HBA2 gene in each cell. For each gene, one copy is inherited from the mother and one is inherited from the father. If each parent is missing at least one gene copy, their children are at risk for having alpha thalassemia. However, the exact risk and the severity of each child's condition depends on how many gene copies are lost (deleted) and which combination of the HBA1 and HBA2 genes are affected.
 Yes, genetic testing is available for HBB, HBA1 and HBA2, the genes known to cause thalassemia. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal testing are possible if the disease-causing mutations in the family are known. The Genetic Testing Registry (GTR) is a centralized online resource for information about genetic tests. It has additional information on genetic testing for alpha thalassemia and beta thalassemia. The intended audience for the GTR is health care providers and researchers. Patients and consumers with specific questions about a genetic test should contact a health care provider or a genetics professional.
 The best treatment options depend on the severity of thalassemia. People affected by a mild form often need little to no treatment, while people with intermediate to severe thalassemias may require frequent blood transfusions, iron chelation therapy (treatments to remove excess iron from the body), and/or folic acid supplementation. For more information on the treatment of thalassemia, please click here.
Beta thalassemia is a blood disorder that reduces the production of hemoglobin. Hemoglobin is the iron-containing protein in red blood cells that carries oxygen to cells throughout the body.  In people with beta thalassemia, low levels of hemoglobin lead to a lack of oxygen in many parts of the body. Affected individuals also have a shortage of red blood cells (anemia), which can cause pale skin, weakness, fatigue, and more serious complications. People with beta thalassemia are at an increased risk of developing abnormal blood clots.  Beta thalassemia is classified into two types depending on the severity of symptoms: thalassemia major (also known as Cooley's anemia) and thalassemia intermedia. Of the two types, thalassemia major is more severe.  The signs and symptoms of thalassemia major appear within the first 2 years of life. Children develop life-threatening anemia. They do not gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive) and may develop yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice). Affected individuals may have an enlarged spleen, liver, and heart, and their bones may be misshapen. Some adolescents with thalassemia major experience delayed puberty. Many people with thalassemia major have such severe symptoms that they need frequent blood transfusions to replenish their red blood cell supply. Over time, an influx of iron-containing hemoglobin from chronic blood transfusions can lead to a buildup of iron in the body, resulting in liver, heart, and hormone problems.  Thalassemia intermedia is milder than thalassemia major. The signs and symptoms of thalassemia intermedia appear in early childhood or later in life. Affected individuals have mild to moderate anemia and may also have slow growth and bone abnormalities.
Beta thalassemia is a fairly common blood disorder worldwide. Thousands of infants with beta thalassemia are born each year. Beta thalassemia occurs most frequently in people from Mediterranean countries, North Africa, the Middle East, India, Central Asia, and Southeast Asia.
Mutations in the HBB gene cause beta thalassemia. The HBB gene provides instructions for making a protein called beta-globin. Beta-globin is a component (subunit) of hemoglobin. Hemoglobin consists of four protein subunits, typically two subunits of beta-globin and two subunits of another protein called alpha-globin.  Some mutations in the HBB gene prevent the production of any beta-globin. The absence of beta-globin is referred to as beta-zero (B0) thalassemia. Other HBB gene mutations allow some beta-globin to be produced but in reduced amounts. A reduced amount of beta-globin is called beta-plus (B+) thalassemia. Having either B0 or B+ thalassemia does not necessarily predict disease severity, however; people with both types have been diagnosed with thalassemia major and thalassemia intermedia.  A lack of beta-globin leads to a reduced amount of functional hemoglobin. Without sufficient hemoglobin, red blood cells do not develop normally, causing a shortage of mature red blood cells. The low number of mature red blood cells leads to anemia and other associated health problems in people with beta thalassemia.
Thalassemia major and thalassemia intermedia are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the HBB gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. Sometimes, however, people with only one HBB gene mutation in each cell develop mild anemia. These mildly affected people are said to have thalassemia minor.  In a small percentage of families, the HBB gene mutation is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. In these cases, one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the signs and symptoms of beta thalassemia.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of beta thalassemia:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Beta-Thalassemia  - Genetic Testing Registry: Beta-thalassemia, dominant inclusion body type  - Genetic Testing Registry: beta Thalassemia  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Thalassemia   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care