Oxygen therapy is a treatment that provides you with extra oxygen. Oxygen is a gas that your body needs to function. Normally, your lungs absorb oxygen from the air you breathe. But some conditions can prevent you from getting enough oxygen.    You may need oxygen if you have       - COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)    - Pneumonia    - A severe asthma attack    - Late-stage heart failure    - Cystic fibrosis    - Sleep apnea       The oxygen comes through nasal prongs, a mask, or a breathing tube. If you have a chronic problem, you may have a portable oxygen tank or a machine in your home.    A different kind of oxygen therapy is called hyperbaric oxygen therapy. It uses oxygen at high pressure to treat wounds and serious infections.    NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
During an emergencysuch as a serious accident, possible heart attack, or other life-threatening eventyou might be started on oxygen therapy right away.
                
Otherwise, your doctor will decide whether you need oxygen therapy based on test results. An arterial blood gas test and a pulse oximetry test can measure the amount of oxygen in your blood.
                
For an arterial blood gas test, a small needle is inserted into an artery, usually in your wrist. A sample of blood is taken from the artery. The sample is then sent to a laboratory, where its oxygen level is measured.
                
For a pulse oximetry test, a small sensor is attached to your fingertip or toe. The sensor uses light to estimate how much oxygen is in your blood.
                
If the tests show that your blood oxygen level is low, your doctor may prescribe oxygen therapy. In the prescription, your doctor will include the number of liters of oxygen per minute that you need (oxygen flow rate). He or she also will include how often you need to use the oxygen (frequency of use).
                
Frequency of use includes when and for how long you should use the oxygen. Depending on your condition and blood oxygen level, you may need oxygen only at certain times, such as during sleep or while exercising.
                
If your doctor prescribes home oxygen therapy, he or she can help you find a home equipment provider. The provider will give you the equipment and other supplies you need.
Oxygen therapy can cause complications and side effects. These problems might include a dry or bloody nose, skin irritation from the nasal cannula or face mask, fatigue (tiredness), and morning headaches.
                
If these problems persist, tell your doctor and home equipment provider. Depending on the problem, your doctor may need to change your oxygen flow rate or the length of time you're using the oxygen.
                
If nose dryness is a problem, your doctor may recommend a nasal spray or have a humidifier added to your oxygen equipment.
                
If you have an uncomfortable nasal cannula or face mask, your home equipment provider can help you find a device that fits better. Your provider also can recommend over-the-counter gels and devices that are designed to lessen skin irritation.
                
Complications from transtracheal oxygen therapy can be more serious. With this type of oxygen therapy, oxygen is delivered through a tube inserted into your windpipe through the front of your neck.
                
With transtracheal oxygen therapy:
                
Mucus balls might develop on the tube inside the windpipe. Mucus balls tend to form as a result of the oxygen drying out the airways. Mucus balls can cause coughing and clog the windpipe or tube.
                
Problems with the tube slipping or breaking.
                
Infection.
                
Injury to the lining of the windpipe.
                
Proper medical care and correct handling of the tube and other supplies may reduce the risk of complications.
                
Other Risks
                
In certain people, oxygen therapy may suppress the drive to breathe, affecting how well the respiratory system works. This is managed by adjusting the oxygen flow rate.
                
Oxygen poses a fire risk, so you'll need to take certain safety steps. Oxygen itself isn't explosive, but it can worsen a fire. In the presence of oxygen, a small fire can quickly get out of control. Also, the cylinder that compressed oxygen gas comes in might explode if exposed to heat.
                
Your home equipment provider will give you a complete list of safety steps you'll need to take at home and when out in public.
                
For example, when you're not using the oxygen, keep it in an airy room. Never store compressed oxygen gas cylinders and liquid oxygen containers in small, enclosed places, such as in closets, behind curtains, or under clothes.
                
Oxygen containers let off small amounts of oxygen. These small amounts can build up to harmful levels if they're allowed to escape into small spaces.