Your throat is a tube that carries food to your esophagus and air to your windpipe and larynx. The technical name for throat is pharynx.     Throat problems are common. You've probably had a sore throat. The cause is usually a viral infection, but other causes include allergies, infection with strep bacteria or the upward movement of stomach acids into the esophagus, called GERD.     Other problems that affect the throat include       - Tonsillitis - an infection in the tonsils    - Pharyngitis - inflammation of the pharynx     - Cancers     - Croup - inflammation, usually in small children, which causes a barking cough       Most throat problems are minor and go away on their own. Treatments, when needed, depend on the problem.
Your throat is a tube that carries food to your esophagus and air to your windpipe and larynx (also called the voice box). The technical name for the throat is pharynx.    You can have a sore throat for many reasons. Often, colds and flu cause sore throats. Other causes can include:       - Allergies    - Mononucleosis    - Smoking    - Strep throat    - Tonsillitis - an infection in the tonsils       Treatment depends on the cause. Sucking on lozenges, drinking lots of liquids, and gargling may ease the pain. Over-the-counter pain relievers can also help, but children should not take aspirin.
Throat cancer is a type of head and neck cancer. Throat cancer has different names, depending on what part of the throat is affected. The different parts of the throat are called the oropharynx, the hypopharynx, and the nasopharynx. Sometimes the larynx, or voice box, is also included.    The main risk factors for throat cancer are smoking or using smokeless tobacco and use of alcohol.    Symptoms of throat cancer may include       - Trouble breathing or speaking    - Frequent headaches    - Pain or ringing in the ears    - Trouble swallowing    - Ear pain       Treatments include surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy.    NIH: National Cancer Institute