Factor V Leiden thrombophilia is an inherited disorder that results in an increased risk of developing abnormal blood clots. Factor V Leiden is the name of a specific gene mutation in the F5 gene. This gene plays a critical role in the normal formation of blood clots in response to an injury. People can inherit one or two copies of the factor V Leiden gene mutation. Those who inherit one copy are called heterozygotes. People who inherit two copies of the mutation, one from each parent, are called homozygotes. Having the factor V Leiden mutation increases your risk for developing a clot in your legs called a deep venous thrombosis (DVT). It also increases your risk of developing a clot that travels through the bloodstream and lodges in the lungs, called a pulmonary embolism (PE).
 Individuals affected by factor V Leiden thrombophilia have an increased risk of developing blood clots. The severity of factor V Leiden thrombophilia is extremely variable. Many individuals with the factor V Leiden allele never develop a blood clot. Although most individuals with factor V thrombophilia do not experience their first thrombotic event until adulthood, some have recurrent thromboembolism before age 30 years. The chance a person will develop a blood clot is affected by the number of factor V Leiden mutations, the presence of coexisting genetic abnormalities, and non-genetic risk factors.  Non-genetic risk factors include surgery, long periods of not moving (like sitting on a long airplane ride), birth control pills and other female hormones, childbirth within the last 6 months, and traumas or fractures. Individuals who inherit one copy of the factor V Leiden mutation have a fourfold to eightfold increase in the chance of developing a clot.  Homozygotes (people who inherit two factor V Leiden mutations) may have up to 80 times the usual risk of developing a blood clot. Considering that the risk of developing an abnormal blood clot averages about 1 in 1,000 per year in the general population, the presence of one copy of the factor V Leiden mutation increases that risk to 4 to 8 in 1,000, and having two copies of the mutation may raise the risk as high as 80 in 1,000. People with factor V Leiden have an increased chance of having a blood clot that forms in large veins in the legs (deep venous thrombosis, or DVT) or a clot that travels through the bloodstream and lodges in the lungs (pulmonary embolism, or PE). Symptoms of deep vein thrombosis usually include leg pain, tenderness, swelling, increased warmth or redness in one leg. The symptoms of pulmonary embolism usually include cough, chest pain, shortness of breath or rapid heartbeat or breathing. To learn more about the symptoms of DVT and PE, click here.
 Factor V Leiden thrombophilia is caused by a specific mutation in the Factor V gene. Factor V plays a critical role in the formation of blood clots in response to injury.  Genes are our bodys instructions for making proteins. The factor V gene instructs the body how to make a protein called coagulation factor V. Coagulation factor V is involved in a series of chemical reactions that hold blood clots together. A molecule called activated protein C (APC) prevents blood clots from growing too large by inactivating factor V.
 Factor V Leiden is a genetic condition and can be inherited from a parent. It is important to understand that each person inherits two copies of every gene, one from their mother and the other copy from their father.  Individuals who inherit one copy of the factor V Leiden mutation from a parent are called heterozygotes. Heterozygotes have a 50% chance with each pregnancy of passing the mutated gene to their offspring (and therefore they also have a 50% chance of having a child who does not inherit the gene mutation). People who inherit two copies of the mutation, one from each parent, are called homozygotes. Homozygotes will always pass one copy of the mutated gene to their offspring. If both parents are heterozygotes (carry one factor V Leiden mutation) than they would have a 25% chance of having a child with two factor V Leiden mutations, a 25% chance of having a child with no mutations, and a 50% chance of having a child with one mutation.
 No clinical features (signs and/or symptoms) are specific for factor V Leiden thrombophilia. The diagnosis of factor V Leiden thrombophilia requires a coagulation screening test or DNA analysis of F5, the gene for factor V, to identify the specific mutation that causes this condition. The APC (activated protein C) resistance assay, a coagulation screening test, measures the anticoagulant response to APC. This screening test has a sensitivity and specificity for factor V Leiden approaching 100%. The sensitivity of a test is a measure of the test's ability to detect a positive result when someone has the condition, while the specificity is a measure of the test's ability to identify negative results.Targeted mutation analysis (a type of DNA test) of the F5 gene for the Leiden mutation is considered definitive and has a mutation detection frequency of approximately 100%. This means that approximately all individuals who have the factor V Leiden mutation will be detected by this genetic test. It is generally recommended that individuals who test positive by another means should then have the DNA test both for confirmation and to distinguish heterozygotes (individuals with a mutation in one copy of the gene) from homozygotes (individuals with mutations in both copies of the gene).
 The management of individuals with factor V Leiden depends on the clinical circumstances. People with factor V Leiden who have had a deep venous thrombosis (DVT) or pulmonary embolism (PE) are usually treated with blood thinners, or anticoagulants. Anticoagulants such as heparin and warfarin are given for varying amounts of time depending on the person's situation. It is not usually recommended that people with factor V Leiden be treated lifelong with anticoagulants if they have had only one DVT or PE, unless there are additional risk factors present. Having had a DVT or PE in the past increases a person's risk for developing another one in the future, but having factor V Leiden does not seem to add to the risk of having a second clot. In general, individuals who have factor V Leiden but have never had a blood clot are not routinely treated with an anticoagulant. Rather, these individuals are counseled about reducing or eliminating other factors that may add to one's risk of developing a clot in the future. In addition, these individuals may require temporary treatment with an anticoagulant during periods of particularly high risk, such as major surgery. Factor V Leiden increases the risk of developing a DVT during pregnancy by about seven-fold. Women with factor V Leiden who are planning pregnancy should discuss this with their obstetrician and/or hematologist. Most women with factor V Leiden have normal pregnancies and only require close follow-up during pregnancy. For those with a history of DVT or PE, treatment with an anticoagulant during a subsequent pregnancy can prevent recurrent problems.
Factor V Leiden thrombophilia is an inherited disorder of blood clotting. Factor V Leiden is the name of a specific gene mutation that results in thrombophilia, which is an increased tendency to form abnormal blood clots that can block blood vessels.  People with factor V Leiden thrombophilia have a higher than average risk of developing a type of blood clot called a deep venous thrombosis (DVT). DVTs occur most often in the legs, although they can also occur in other parts of the body, including the brain, eyes, liver, and kidneys. Factor V Leiden thrombophilia also increases the risk that clots will break away from their original site and travel through the bloodstream. These clots can lodge in the lungs, where they are known as pulmonary emboli. Although factor V Leiden thrombophilia increases the risk of blood clots, only about 10 percent of individuals with the factor V Leiden mutation ever develop abnormal clots.  The factor V Leiden mutation is associated with a slightly increased risk of pregnancy loss (miscarriage). Women with this mutation are two to three times more likely to have multiple (recurrent) miscarriages or a pregnancy loss during the second or third trimester. Some research suggests that the factor V Leiden mutation may also increase the risk of other complications during pregnancy, including pregnancy-induced high blood pressure (preeclampsia), slow fetal growth, and early separation of the placenta from the uterine wall (placental abruption). However, the association between the factor V Leiden mutation and these complications has not been confirmed. Most women with factor V Leiden thrombophilia have normal pregnancies.
Factor V Leiden is the most common inherited form of thrombophilia. Between 3 and 8 percent of people with European ancestry carry one copy of the factor V Leiden mutation in each cell, and about 1 in 5,000 people have two copies of the mutation. The mutation is less common in other populations.
A particular mutation in the F5 gene causes factor V Leiden thrombophilia. The F5 gene provides instructions for making a protein called coagulation factor V. This protein plays a critical role in the coagulation system, which is a series of chemical reactions that forms blood clots in response to injury.  The coagulation system is controlled by several proteins, including a protein called activated protein C (APC). APC normally inactivates coagulation factor V, which slows down the clotting process and prevents clots from growing too large. However, in people with factor V Leiden thrombophilia, coagulation factor V cannot be inactivated normally by APC. As a result, the clotting process remains active longer than usual, increasing the chance of developing abnormal blood clots.  Other factors also increase the risk of developing blood clots in people with factor V Leiden thrombophilia. These factors include increasing age, obesity, injury, surgery, smoking, pregnancy, and the use of oral contraceptives (birth control pills) or hormone replacement therapy. The risk of abnormal clots is also much higher in people who have a combination of the factor V Leiden mutation and another mutation in the F5 gene. Additionally, the risk is increased in people who have the factor V Leiden mutation together with a mutation in another gene involved in the coagulation system.
The chance of developing an abnormal blood clot depends on whether a person has one or two copies of the factor V Leiden mutation in each cell. People who inherit two copies of the mutation, one from each parent, have a higher risk of developing a clot than people who inherit one copy of the mutation. Considering that about 1 in 1,000 people per year in the general population will develop an abnormal blood clot, the presence of one copy of the factor V Leiden mutation increases that risk to 3 to 8 in 1,000, and having two copies of the mutation may raise the risk to as high as 80 in 1,000.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of factor V Leiden thrombophilia:  - American College of Medical Genetics Consensus Statement on Factor V Leiden Mutation Testing  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Factor V Leiden Thrombophilia  - GeneFacts: Factor V Leiden-Associated Thrombosis: Diagnosis  - GeneFacts: Factor V Leiden-Associated Thrombosis: Management  - Genetic Testing Registry: Thrombophilia due to activated protein C resistance  - Genetic Testing Registry: Thrombophilia due to factor V Leiden  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Deep Venous Thrombosis  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Pulmonary Embolus   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care