Thrombocythemia (THROM-bo-si-THE-me-ah) and thrombocytosis (THROM-bo-si-TO-sis) are conditions in which your blood has a higher than normal number of platelets (PLATE-lets).
                
Platelets are blood cell fragments. They're made in your bone marrow along with other kinds of blood cells.
                
Platelets travel through your blood vessels and stick together (clot). Clotting helps stop any bleeding that may occur if a blood vessel is damaged. Platelets also are called thrombocytes (THROM-bo-sites) because a blood clot also is called a thrombus.
                
A normal platelet count ranges from 150,000 to 450,000 platelets per microliter of blood.
                
Overview
                
The term "thrombocythemia" is preferred when the cause of a high platelet count isn't known. The condition sometimes is called primary or essential thrombocythemia.
                
This condition occurs if faulty cells in the bone marrow make too many platelets. Bone marrow is the sponge-like tissue inside the bones. It contains stem cells that develop into red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. What causes the bone marrow to make too many platelets often isn't known.
                
With primary thrombocythemia, a high platelet count may occur alone or with other blood cell disorders. This condition isn't common.
                
When another disease or condition causes a high platelet count, the term "thrombocytosis" is preferred. This condition often is called secondary or reactive thrombocytosis. Secondary thrombocytosis is more common than primary thrombocythemia.
                
Often, a high platelet count doesn't cause signs or symptoms. Rarely, serious or life-threatening symptoms can develop, such as blood clots and bleeding. These symptoms are more likely to occur in people who have primary thrombocythemia.
                
Outlook
                
People who have primary thrombocythemia with no signs or symptoms don't need treatment, as long as the condition remains stable.
                
Other people who have this condition may need medicines or procedures to treat it. Most people who have primary thrombocythemia will live a normal lifespan.
                
Treatment and outlook for secondary thrombocytosis depend on its underlying cause.
Primary Thrombocythemia
                
In this condition, faulty stem cells in the bone marrow make too many platelets. What causes this to happen usually isn't known. When this process occurs without other blood cell disorders, it's called essential thrombocythemia.
                
A rare form of thrombocythemia is inherited. ("Inherited" means the condition is passed from parents to children through the genes.) In some cases, a genetic mutation may cause the condition.
                
In addition to the bone marrow making too many platelets, the platelets also are abnormal in primary thrombocythemia. They may form blood clots or, surprisingly, cause bleeding when they don't work well.
                
Bleeding also can occur because of a condition that develops called von Willebrand disease. This condition affects the blood clotting process.
                
After many years, scarring of the bone marrow can occur.
                
Secondary Thrombocytosis
                
This condition occurs if another disease, condition, or outside factor causes the platelet count to rise. For example, 35 percent of people who have high platelet counts also have cancermostly lung, gastrointestinal, breast, ovarian, and lymphoma. Sometimes a high platelet count is the first sign of cancer.
                
Other conditions or factors that can cause a high platelet count are:
                
Iron-deficiency anemia (uh-NEE-me-uh)
                
Hemolytic (HEE-moh-lit-ick) anemia
                
Absence of a spleen (after surgery to remove the organ)
                
Inflammatory or infectious diseases, such as connective tissue disorders, inflammatory bowel disease, and tuberculosis
                
Reactions to medicine
                
Some conditions can lead to a high platelet count that lasts for only a short time. Examples of such conditions include:
                
Recovery from serious blood loss
                
Recovery from a very low platelet count caused by excessive alcohol use and lack of vitamin B12 or folate
                
Acute (short-term) infection or inflammation
                
Response to physical activity
                
Although the platelet count is high in secondary thrombocytosis, the platelets are normal (unlike in primary thrombocythemia). Thus, people who have secondary thrombocytosis have a lower risk of blood clots and bleeding.
Primary Thrombocythemia
                
Thrombocythemia isn't common. The exact number of people who have the condition isn't known. Some estimates suggest that 24 out of every 100,000 people have primary thrombocythemia.
                
Primary thrombocythemia is more common in people aged 50 to 70, but it can occur at any age. For unknown reasons, more women around the age of 30 have primary thrombocythemia than men of the same age.
                
Secondary Thrombocytosis
                
You might be at risk for secondary thrombocytosis if you have a disease, condition, or factor that can cause it. (For more information, go to "What Causes Thrombocythemia and Thrombocytosis?")
                
Secondary thrombocytosis is more common than primary thrombocythemia. Studies have shown that most people who have platelet counts over 500,000 have secondary thrombocytosis.
You can't prevent primary thrombocythemia. However, you can take steps to reduce your risk for complications. For example, you can control many of the risk factors for blood clots, such as high blood cholesterol, high blood pressure, diabetes, and smoking.
                
To reduce your risk, quit smoking, adopt healthy lifestyle habits, and work with your doctor to manage your risk factors.
                
It's not always possible to prevent conditions that lead to secondary thrombocytosis. But, if you have routine medical care, your doctor may detect these conditions before you develop a high platelet count.