Your thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in your neck, just above your collarbone. It makes hormones that help the body work normally. There are several types of cancer of the thyroid gland. You are at greater risk if you       - Are between ages 25 and 65    - Are a woman    - Are Asian    - Have a family member who has had thyroid disease    - Have had radiation treatments to your head or neck       You should see a doctor if you have a lump or swelling in your neck. Doctors use a physical exam, blood tests, imaging tests, and a biopsy to diagnose thyroid cancer. Treatment depends on the type of cancer you have and how far the cancer has spread. Many patients receive a combination of treatments. They may include surgery, radioactive iodine, hormone treatment, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or targeted therapy. Targeted therapy uses substances that attack cancer cells without harming normal cells.    NIH: National Cancer Institute
Your thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in your neck, just above your collarbone. It is one of your endocrine glands, which make hormones. Thyroid hormones control the rate of many activities in your body. These include how fast you burn calories and how fast your heart beats. All of these activities are your body's metabolism.    Thyroid problems include       - Goiter - enlargement of the thyroid gland    - Hyperthyroidism - when your thyroid gland makes more thyroid hormones than your body needs    - Hypothyroidism - when your thyroid gland does not make enough thyroid hormones    - Thyroid cancer    - Thyroid nodules - lumps in the thyroid gland    - Thyroiditis - swelling of the thyroid       Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health
Thyroid disease is a disorder that affects the thyroid gland. Sometimes the body produces too much or too little thyroid hormone. Thyroid hormones regulate metabolismthe way the body uses energyand affect nearly every organ in the body. Too much thyroid hormone is called hyperthyroidism and can cause many of the bodys functions to speed up. Too little thyroid hormone is called hypothyroidism and can cause many of the bodys functions to slow down.
                
Thyroid hormone plays a critical role during pregnancy both in the development of a healthy baby and in maintaining the health of the mother.
                
Women with thyroid problems can have a healthy pregnancy and protect their fetuses health by learning about pregnancys effect on the thyroid, keeping current on their thyroid function testing, and taking the required medications.
During pregnancy, the body requires higher amounts of some nutrients to support the health of the mother and growing baby. Experts recommend pregnant women maintain a balanced diet and take a prenatal multivitamin and mineral supplement containing iodine to receive most nutrients necessary for thyroid health. More information about diet and nutrition during pregnancy is provided by the National Agricultural Library available at www.choosemyplate.gov/nutritional-needs-during-pregnancy.
                
Dietary Supplements
                
Because the thyroid uses iodine to make thyroid hormone, iodine is an important mineral for a mother during pregnancy. During pregnancy, the baby gets iodine from the mothers diet. Women need more iodine when they are pregnantabout 250 micrograms a day. In the United States, about 7 percent of pregnant women may not get enough iodine in their diet or through prenatal vitamins.3 Choosing iodized saltsalt supplemented with iodineover plain salt and prenatal vitamins containing iodine will ensure this need is met.
                
However, people with autoimmune thyroid disease may be sensitive to harmful side effects from iodine. Taking iodine drops or eating foods containing large amounts of iodinesuch as seaweed, dulse, or kelpmay cause or worsen hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism. More information about iodine is provided by the National Library of Medicine in the fact sheet, Iodine in diet.
                
To help ensure coordinated and safe care, people should discuss their use of dietary supplements with their health care provider. Tips for talking with health care providers are available at the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health's Time to Talk campaign.