Your tongue helps you taste, swallow, and chew. You also use it to speak. Your tongue is made up of many muscles. The upper surface contains your taste buds.     Problems with the tongue include       -  Pain     -  Swelling    -  Changes in color or texture    -  Abnormal movement or difficulty moving the tongue    -  Taste problems       These problems can have many different causes. Treatment depends on the underlying problem.
Hairy tongue is a condition in which the the central top portion of the tongue presents with an abnormal coloring.  Although the abnormal coating is typically black in color, brown, yellow, and green discoloration has been described.
 The exact cause is unknown; however, smoking, alcohol, dehydration, use of antibiotics, low saliva production, trigeminal neuralgia, poor oral hygiene and cranial radiation therapy have shown to bring about hairy tongue.
 Although hairy tongue normally resolves on its own, patients are encouraged to avoid the factors that have been shown to bring about hairy tongue. Treatment usually involves gentle cleaning of the tongue with a soft toothbrush.  Medication is rarely prescribed for hairy tongue; however, in severe cases, antifungals, retinoids or mouthwashes may be used.  If treatment fails, the affected portion of the tongue called the papillae (finger-like projections) may be clipped or removed using techniques such as carbon dioxide laser burning or electrodesiccation (a procedure in which an electrical current is used to seal of the affected area).
Geographic tongue is a condition that causes chronic and recurrent lesions on the tongue that resemble psoriasis of the skin. It is characterized by pink to red, slightly depressed lesions with irregular, elevated, white or yellow borders. The lesions may also occur in the mucosa of the mouth and labia; this condition is called "areata migrans" because they  typically disappear from one area and move to another. The tongue is normally covered with tiny, pinkish-white bumps (papillae), which are actually short, fine, hair-like projections. With geographic tongue, patches on the surface of the tongue are missing papillae and appear as smooth, red "islands," often with slightly raised borders. These patches (lesions) give the tongue a map-like, or geographic, appearance. In most cases there are no symptoms but sometimes it is painful when inflamed. The cause is still unknown. Many researchers think it is linked with psoriasis but more research is needed to better understand the connection. Also, hereditary and environmental factors may be involved. The condition is benign and localized, generally requiring no treatment except reassurance. If painful it may be treated with steroid gels or antihistamine mouth rinses.[12267]
 The lesions seen in geographic tongue resemble those of psoriasis. Most patients do not experience symptoms. It has been estimated that about 5% of individuals who have geographic tongue complain of sensitivity to hot or spicy foods when the their lesions are active. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Geographic tongue. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Furrowed tongue - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 The exact cause of geographic tongue has not been identified. However, because the condition may be present in several members of the same family, genetics may increase a person's chances of developing the condition. A study by Guimares (2007) showed that a specific variant of a gene called IL-1B (interleukin-1 beta) is associated with an increased risk of developing geographic tongue and suggests a genetic basis for the development of the disease. Further research may result in a better understanding of the genetic influences involved in the development of geographic tongue.
 Because geographic tongue is a benign (harmless) condition and does not typically cause symptoms, treatment is usually unnecessary. Even those patients who experience sensitivity to hot or spicy foods, generally do not require treatment. With severe symptoms, topical corticosteroids, zinc supplements, and topical anesthetic rinses seem to reduce the discomfort in some patients.