Arterial tortuosity syndrome is a rare disorder; its prevalence is unknown. About 100 cases have been reported in the medical literature.
Arterial tortuosity syndrome is caused by mutations in the SLC2A10 gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called GLUT10. The level of GLUT10 appears to be involved in the regulation of a process called the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-) signaling pathway. This pathway is involved in cell growth and division (proliferation) and the process by which cells mature to carry out special functions (differentiation). The TGF- signaling pathway is also involved in bone and blood vessel development and the formation of the extracellular matrix, an intricate lattice of proteins and other molecules that forms in the spaces between cells and defines the structure and properties of connective tissues.  SLC2A10 gene mutations that cause arterial tortuosity syndrome reduce or eliminate GLUT10 function. By mechanisms that are not well understood, a lack (deficiency) of functional GLUT10 protein leads to overactivity (upregulation) of TGF- signaling. Excessive growth signaling results in elongation of the arteries, leading to tortuosity. Overactive TGF- signaling also interferes with normal formation of the connective tissues in other parts of the body, leading to the additional signs and symptoms of arterial tortuosity syndrome.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of arterial tortuosity syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Arterial Tortuosity Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Arterial tortuosity syndrome  - Johns Hopkins McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine  - National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: How is an Aneurysm Treated?   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care