A Common Problem With Aging Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are a common bladder problem, especially as people age. UTIs are the second most common type of infection in the body. Each year, UTIs cause more than 8 million visits to health care providers. UTIs can happen anywhere in the urinary system (which includes the kidneys, bladder, and urethra). But UTIs are most common in the bladder. A UTI in the bladder is called cystitis. Infections in the bladder can spread to the kidneys. A UTI in the kidneys is called pyelonephritis. Sometimes, a UTI can also develop in the urethra, but this is less common. A UTI in the urethra is called urethritis. Some UTIs Lead to Severe Problems Most UTIs are not serious. But some UTIs, such as kidney infections, can lead to severe problems. Bacteria from a kidney infection may spread to the bloodstream, causing a life-threatening condition called septicemia. When kidney infections occur frequently or last a long time, they may cause permanent damage to the kidneys, including kidney scars, poor kidney function, and high blood pressure.
Symptoms of a UTI in the bladder may include - cloudy, bloody, or foul-smelling urine  - pain or burning during urination  - strong and frequent need to urinate, even right after emptying the bladder  - a mild fever below 101 degrees Fahrenheit in some people. cloudy, bloody, or foul-smelling urine pain or burning during urination strong and frequent need to urinate, even right after emptying the bladder a mild fever below 101 degrees Fahrenheit in some people. If the UTI spreads to the kidneys, symptoms may include - chills and shaking   - night sweats  - feeling tired or generally ill   - fever above 101 degrees Fahrenheit  - pain in the side, back, or groin  - flushed, warm, or reddened skin  - mental changes or confusion   - nausea and vomiting  - very bad abdominal pain in some people. chills and shaking night sweats feeling tired or generally ill fever above 101 degrees Fahrenheit pain in the side, back, or groin flushed, warm, or reddened skin mental changes or confusion nausea and vomiting very bad abdominal pain in some people. Symptoms may differ depending on age, gender, and catheter use. In some elderly people, mental changes and confusion may be the only signs of a UTI. Older women and men with a UTI are more likely to be tired, shaky, and weak. They are also more likely to have muscle aches and abdominal pain. In a person with a catheter, the only symptom may be fever that does not have another likely cause. Learn more about the signs and symptoms of urinary tract infections in adults.
Although everyone has some risk for UTIs, some people are more likely to get UTIs than others. These include people who have -  spinal cord injuries or other nerve damage around the bladder   -  a blockage in the urinary tract that can trap urine in the bladder. A blockage in the urinary tract can be caused by kidney stones, an enlarged prostate, or a birth defect.   -  diabetes   -  problems with the bodys natural defense (or immune) system   -  pelvic organ prolapse, which is when pelvic organs (such as the bladder, rectum, or uterus) shift out of their normal position into the vagina. When pelvic organs are out of place, they can push on the bladder and urethra and make it hard to fully empty the bladder. This causes urine to stay in the bladder. When urine stays in the bladder too long, it makes an infection more likely.  spinal cord injuries or other nerve damage around the bladder a blockage in the urinary tract that can trap urine in the bladder. A blockage in the urinary tract can be caused by kidney stones, an enlarged prostate, or a birth defect. diabetes problems with the bodys natural defense (or immune) system pelvic organ prolapse, which is when pelvic organs (such as the bladder, rectum, or uterus) shift out of their normal position into the vagina. When pelvic organs are out of place, they can push on the bladder and urethra and make it hard to fully empty the bladder. This causes urine to stay in the bladder. When urine stays in the bladder too long, it makes an infection more likely. Learn more about risk factors for urinary tract infections.
Because most UTIs are caused by bacteria, bacteria-fighting medications called antibiotics are the usual treatment. The type of antibiotic and length of treatment depend on the patients history and the type of bacteria causing the infection. Bladder infections may eventually get better on their own. But antibiotics can make the symptoms go away much more quickly. People usually feel better within a day or two of starting antibiotics. Drinking lots of fluids and urinating often may also speed healing. If needed, pain-killers can relieve the pain of a UTI. A heating pad on the back or abdomen may also help. Learn more about treating urinary tract infections.
A UTI is an infection in the urinary tract. Infections are caused by microbesorganisms too small to be seen without a microscopeincluding fungi, viruses, and bacteria. Bacteria are the most common cause of UTIs. Normally, bacteria that enter the urinary tract are rapidly removed by the body before they cause symptoms. However, sometimes bacteria overcome the bodys natural defenses and cause infection. An infection in the urethra is called urethritis. A bladder infection is called cystitis. Bacteria may travel up the ureters to multiply and infect the kidneys. A kidney infection is called pyelonephritis.
Most UTIs are caused by bacteria that live in the bowel. The bacterium Escherichia coli (E. coli) causes the vast majority of UTIs. The urinary tract has several systems to prevent infection. The points where the ureters attach to the bladder act like one-way valves to prevent urine from backing up, or refluxing, toward the kidneys, and urination washes microbes out of the body. Immune defenses also prevent infection. But despite these safeguards, infections still occur. Certain bacteria have a strong ability to attach themselves to the lining of the urinary tract.
                
Children who often delay urination are more likely to develop UTIs. Regular urination helps keep the urinary tract sterile by flushing away bacteria. Holding in urine allows bacteria to grow. Producing too little urine because of inadequate fluid intake can also increase the risk of developing a UTI. Chronic constipationa condition in which a child has fewer than two bowel movements a weekcan add to the risk of developing a UTI. When the bowel is full of hard stool, it presses against the bladder and bladder neck, blocking the flow of urine and allowing bacteria to grow.
                
Some children develop UTIs because they are prone to such infections, just as other children are prone to getting coughs, colds, or ear infections.
Urinary tract infections affect about 3 percent of children in the United States every year. UTIs account for more than 1 million visits to pediatricians offices every year.1
Throughout childhood, the risk of having a UTI is 2 percent for boys and 8 percent for girls. Having an anomaly of the urinary tract, such as urine reflux from the bladder back into the ureters, increases the risk of a UTI. Boys who are younger than 6 months old who are not circumcised are at greater risk for a UTI than circumcised boys the same age.1
Symptoms of a UTI range from slight burning with urination or unusual-smelling urine to severe pain and high fever. A child with a UTI may also have no symptoms. A UTI causes irritation of the lining of the bladder, urethra, ureters, and kidneys, just as the inside of the nose or the throat becomes irritated with a cold. In infants or children who are only a few years old, the signs of a UTI may not be clear because children that young cannot express exactly how they feel. Children may have a high fever, be irritable, or not eat.
                
On the other hand, children may have only a low-grade fever; experience nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea; or just not seem healthy. Children who have a high fever and appear sick for more than a day without signs of a runny nose or other obvious cause for discomfort should be checked for a UTI.
                
Older children with UTIs may complain of pain in the middle and lower abdomen. They may urinate often. Crying or complaining that it hurts to urinate and producing only a few drops of urine at a time are other signs of a UTI. Children may leak urine into clothing or bedsheets. The urine may look cloudy or bloody. If a kidney is infected, children may complain of pain in the back or side below the ribs.
                
Parents should talk with their health care provider if they suspect their child has a UTI.
Only a health care provider can determine whether a child has a UTI.
                
A urine sample will be collected and examined. The way urine is collected depends on the childs age:
                
- If the child is not yet toilet trained, the health care provider may place a plastic collection bag over the childs genital area. The bag will be sealed to the skin with an adhesive strip. If this method is used, the bag should be removed right after the child has urinated, and the urine sample should be processed immediately. Because bacteria from the skin can contaminate this sample, the methods listed below are more accurate.  - A health care provider may need to pass a small tube called a catheter into the urethra of an infant. Urine will drain directly from the bladder into a clean container.  - Sometimes the best way to collect a urine sample from an infant is by placing a needle directly into the bladder through the skin of the lower abdomen. Getting urine through a catheter or needle will ensure that the urine collected does not contain bacteria from the skin.  - An older child may be asked to urinate into a container. The sample needs to come as directly into the container as possible to avoid picking up bacteria from the skin or rectal area.
                
Some of the urine will be examined with a microscope. If an infection is present, bacteria and sometimes pus will be found in the urine. A urine culture should also be performed on some of the urine. The culture is performed by placing part of the urine sample in a tube or dish with a substance that encourages any bacteria present to grow. Once the bacteria have multiplied, which usually takes 1 to 3 days, they can be identified.
                
The reliability of the culture depends on how the urine is collected and how long the urine stands before the culture is started. If the urine sample is collected at home, it should be refrigerated as soon as it is collected. The container should be carried to the health care provider or lab in a plastic bag filled with ice.
                
The health care provider may also order a sensitivity test, which tests the bacteria for sensitivity to different antibiotics to see which medication is best for treating the infection.
Most UTIs are caused by bacteria, which are treated with bacteria-fighting medications called antibiotics or antimicrobials. While a urine sample is sent to a laboratory, the health care provider may begin treatment with an antibiotic that treats the bacteria most likely to be causing the infection. Once culture results are known, the health care provider may decide to switch the childs antibiotic.
                
The choice of medication and length of treatment depend on the childs history and the type of bacteria causing the infection. When a child is sick or unable to drink fluids, the antibiotic may need to be put directly into the bloodstream through a vein in the arm or hand or be given as an injection. Otherwise, the medicationliquid or pillsmay be given by mouth. The medication is given for at least 3 to 5 days and possibly for as long as several weeks. The daily treatment schedule recommended depends on the specific medication prescribed: The schedule may call for a single dose each day or up to four doses each day. In some cases, a child will need to take the medication until further tests are finished.
                
After a few doses of the antibiotic, a child may appear much better, but often several days may pass before all symptoms are gone. In any case, the medication should be taken for as long as the health care provider recommends. Medications should not be stopped because the symptoms have gone away. Infections may return, and bacteria can resist future treatment if the medication is stopped too soon.
                
If needed, the health care provider may recommend an appropriate over-the-counter medication to relieve the pain of a UTI. A heating pad on the back or abdomen may also help.
If a child has a normal urinary tract, parents can help the child avoid UTIs by encouraging regular trips to the bathroom. The parents should make sure the child gets enough to drink if infrequent urination is a problem. The child should be taught proper cleaning techniques after using the bathroom to keep bacteria from entering the urinary tract. Loose-fitting clothes and cotton underwear allow air to dry the area. Parents should consult a health care provider about the best ways to treat constipation.
Children with a UTI should drink as much as they wish and not be forced to drink large amounts of fluid. The health care provider needs to know if a child is not interested in drinking or is unable to drink.