A UTI is an infection in the urinary tract. Infections are caused by microbesorganisms too small to be seen without a microscope. Bacteria * are the most common cause of UTIs. Normally, bacteria that enter the urinary tract are quickly removed by the body before they cause symptoms. But sometimes bacteria overcome the bodys natural defenses and cause infection.
                
*See the Pronunciation Guide for tips on how to say the underlined words.
Most UTIs are caused by bacteria that live in the bowel, the part of the digestive tract where stool is changed from liquid to solid. The bacterium Escherichia coli (E. coli) causes most UTIs. The urinary tract has several systems to prevent infection. The points where the ureters attach to the bladder act like one-way valves to prevent urine from backing up, or refluxing, toward the kidneys, and urination washes microbes out of the body. The bodys natural defenses also prevent infection. But despite these safeguards, infections still occur.
                
Other factors that may cause a child to get a UTI include the following:
                
- Waiting to urinate. Regular urination helps flush away bacteria. Holding urine allows bacteria to grow.  - Making too little urine. A child that doesnt drink enough fluids may not make enough urine to flush away bacteria.  - Constipation. Constipation is a condition in which a child has fewer than two bowel movements a week. Stools can be hard, dry, small, and difficult to pass. The hard stool in the bowel may press against the urinary tract and block the flow of urine, allowing bacteria to grow.
                
Some children are just more prone to UTIs than others, just as some children are more prone to getting coughs, colds, or ear infections.
Any child can get a UTI, though girls get UTIs more often than boys.
                
Children with a condition called vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) are at higher risk for UTIs. VUR causes urine to reflux at the point where one or both ureters attach to the bladder. When urine stays in the urinary tract, bacteria have a chance to grow and spread. Infants and young children who get a UTI often have VUR.
                
Boys younger than 6 months who are not circumcised are at greater risk for a UTI than circumcised boys the same age. Boys who are circumcised have had the foreskin, which is the skin that covers the tip of the penis, removed.
A child with a UTI may not have any symptoms. When symptoms are present, they can range from mild to severe. UTI symptoms can include
                
- fever  - pain or burning during urination with only a few drops of urine at a time  - irritability  - not eating  - nausea  - diarrhea  - vomiting  - cloudy, dark, bloody, or foul-smelling urine  - urinating often  - pain in the back or side below the ribs  - leaking urine into clothes or bedding in older children
A UTI is diagnosed by testing a sample of your childs urine. The way the urine is collected depends on your childs age:
                
The health care provider looks at the urine sample with a microscope to check for bacteria or pus. The sample is also sent to a lab. The lab performs a urine culture by placing the sample in a tube or dish with a substance that encourages any bacteria present to grow. The bacteria that grow can be identified and tested to see which medicines will work best to treat the infection. A urine culture usually takes 1 to 3 days to complete.
Bacteria-fighting medicines called antibiotics are used to treat a UTI. While the lab is doing the urine culture, the health care provider may begin treatment with an antibiotic that treats the bacteria most likely to be causing the infection. Once culture results are known, the health care provider may switch your child to a different antibiotic that targets the specific type of bacteria.
                
Your child will need to take antibiotics for at least 3 to 5 days and maybe as long as several weeks. Be sure your child takes every pill or every dose of liquid. Your child should feel better after a couple of days, but the infection might come back if your child stops taking the antibiotic too early.
                
You should let your child drink as much as your child wants. But dont force your child to drink large amounts of fluid. Call your childs health care provider if your child doesnt want to or isnt able to drink. Also, talk with your childs health care provider if your child needs medicine for the pain of a UTI. The health care provider can recommend an over-the-counter pain medicine. A heating pad on the back or abdomen may also help.
You can take the following steps to help prevent your child from getting a UTI:
                
- Teach your child not to hold in urine and to go to the bathroom whenever your child feels the urge.  - Teach your child how to properly clean himself or herself after using the bathroom to keep bacteria from entering the urinary tract.  - Have your child wear loose-fitting clothes. Tight clothes can trap moisture, which allows bacteria to grow.  - Buy your child cotton underwear. Cotton lets in air to dry the area.  - If your child has constipation, talk with a health care provider about the best treatment options.
To help prevent a UTI, make sure your child drinks enough fluids each day. Talk with your childs health care provider to find out how much fluid your child should drink.
A UTI is an infection in the urinary tract. Infections are caused by microbesorganisms too small to be seen without a microscopeincluding fungi, viruses, and bacteria. Bacteria are the most common cause of UTIs. Normally, bacteria that enter the urinary tract are rapidly removed by the body before they cause symptoms. However, sometimes bacteria overcome the bodys natural defenses and cause infection. An infection in the urethra is called urethritis. A bladder infection is called cystitis. Bacteria may travel up the ureters to multiply and infect the kidneys. A kidney infection is called pyelonephritis.
Most UTIs are caused by bacteria that live in the bowel. The bacterium Escherichia coli (E. coli) causes the vast majority of UTIs. Microbes called Chlamydia and Mycoplasma can infect the urethra and reproductive system but not the bladder. Chlamydia and Mycoplasma infections may be sexually transmitted and require treatment of sexual partners.
                
The urinary tract has several systems to prevent infection. The points where the ureters attach to the bladder act like one-way valves to prevent urine from backing up toward the kidneys, and urination washes microbes out of the body. In men, the prostate gland produces secretions that slow bacterial growth. In both sexes, immune defenses also prevent infection. But despite these safeguards, infections still occur. Certain bacteria have a strong ability to attach themselves to the lining of the urinary tract.
Urinary tract infections are the second most common type of infection in the body, accounting for about 8.1 million visits to health care providers each year.1 Women are especially prone to UTIs for anatomical reasons. One factor is that a womans urethra is shorter, allowing bacteria quicker access to the bladder. Also, a womans urethral opening is near sources of bacteria from the anus and vagina. For women, the lifetime risk of having a UTI is greater than 50 percent.2 UTIs in men are not as common as in women but can be serious when they occur.
Symptoms of a UTI vary by age, gender, and whether a catheter is present. Among young women, UTI symptoms typically include a frequent and intense urge to urinate and a painful, burning feeling in the bladder or urethra during urination. The amount of urine may be very small. Older women and men are more likely to be tired, shaky, and weak and have muscle aches and abdominal pain. Urine may look cloudy, dark, or bloody or have a foul smell. In a person with a catheter, the only symptom may be fever that cannot be attributed to any other cause. Normally, UTIs do not cause fever if they are in the bladder. A fever may mean the infection has reached the kidneys or has penetrated the prostate. Other symptoms of a kidney infection include pain in the back or side below the ribs, nausea, and vomiting.
Changing some daily habits may help a person prevent recurrent UTIs.
                
Eating, Diet, and Nutrition
                
Drinking lots of fluid can help flush bacteria from the system. Water is best. Most people should try for six to eight, 8-ounce glasses a day. Talk with your health care provider if you cant drink the recommended amount due to other health problems, such as urinary incontinence, urinary frequency, or kidney failure.
                
Urination Habits
                
A person should urinate often and when the urge arises. Bacteria can grow when urine stays in the bladder too long. Women and men should urinate shortly after sex to flush away bacteria that might have entered the urethra during sex. Drinking a glass of water will also help flush bacteria away.
                
After using the toilet, women should wipe from front to back. This step is most important after a bowel movement to keep bacteria from getting into the urethra.
                
Clothing
                
Cotton underwear and loose-fitting clothes should be worn, so air can keep the area around the urethra dry. Tight-fitting jeans and nylon underwear should be avoided because they can trap moisture and help bacteria grow.
                
Birth Control
                
For women, using a diaphragm or spermicide for birth control can lead to UTIs by increasing bacteria growth. A woman who has trouble with UTIs should try switching to a new form of birth control. Unlubricated condoms or spermicidal condoms increase irritation, which may help bacteria grow. Switching to lubricated condoms without spermicide or using a nonspermicidal lubricant may help prevent UTIs.
- Most urinary tract infections (UTIs) arise from one type of bacteria, Escherichia coli (E. coli), which normally lives in the bowel.  - Symptoms of a UTI in adults may include the following:      - a frequent and intense urge to urinate    - a painful, burning feeling in the bladder or urethra during urination    - feeling tired, shaky, and weak    - muscle aches    - abdominal pain    - only small amounts of urine passed, despite a strong urge to urinate    - cloudy, dark, or bloody urine or urine that has a foul smell    - pain in the back or side below the ribs    - nausea and vomiting    - Fever may indicate a kidney or prostate infection.  - Because bacteria can be found in the urine of healthy individuals, a UTI is diagnosed based both on symptoms and a laboratory test.  - UTIs are treated with bacteria-fighting medications called antibiotics or antimicrobials.