The exact incidence of transthyretin amyloidosis is unknown. In northern Portugal, the incidence of this condition is thought to be one in 538 people. Transthyretin amyloidosis is less common among Americans of European descent, where it is estimated to affect one in 100,000 people. The cardiac form of transthyretin amyloidosis is more common among people with African ancestry. It is estimated that this form affects between 3 percent and 3.9 percent of African Americans and approximately 5 percent of people in some areas of West Africa.
Mutations in the TTR gene cause transthyretin amyloidosis. The TTR gene provides instructions for producing a protein called transthyretin. Transthyretin transports vitamin A (retinol) and a hormone called thyroxine throughout the body. To transport retinol and thyroxine, four transthyretin proteins must be attached (bound) to each other to form a four-protein unit (tetramer). Transthyretin is produced primarily in the liver. A small amount of this protein is produced in an area of the brain called the choroid plexus and in the light-sensitive tissue that lines the back of the eye (the retina).  TTR gene mutations are thought to alter the structure of transthyretin, impairing its ability to bind to other transthyretin proteins and altering its normal function.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  In most cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. Rarely, cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Not all people who have a TTR gene mutation will develop transthyretin amyloidosis.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of transthyretin amyloidosis:  - Boston University: Amyloid Treatment & Research Program  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Familial Transthyretin Amyloidosis  - Genetic Testing Registry: Amyloidogenic transthyretin amyloidosis  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Autonomic neuropathy   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care