Troyer syndrome is a neurological disorder and one of the many types of hereditary spastic paraplegia. Signs and symptoms typically begin in early childhood and may include progressive muscle weakness and stiffness (spasticity) in the legs; muscle wasting in the hands and feet; paraplegia; leg contractures; developmental delays; speech difficulty; mood swings; and short stature. Symptoms worsen over time, with most people needing a wheelchair by their 50s or 60s. Life expectancy is normal. Troyer syndrome is caused by mutations in the SPG20 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive.
 Troyer syndrome is caused by mutations in the SPG20 gene. This gene gives the body instructions to make a protein called spartin, which is present in many body tissues, including those of the nervous system. However, the function of this protein is not fully understood. It is thought to play various roles needed for the functions of cells. Troyer syndrome is assumed to be caused by a loss of function of the spartin protein. More research on the normal functions of the spartin protein is needed to better understand exactly how mutations in the SPG20 gene cause the features of Troyer syndrome.
How  Troyer syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that to be affected, a person must have a mutation in both copies of the responsible gene in each cell. Affected people inherit one mutated copy of the gene from each parent, who is referred to as a carrier. Carriers of an autosomal recessive condition typically do not have any signs or symptoms (they are unaffected). When 2 carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has: a 25% (1 in 4) chance to be affected a 50% (1 in 2) chance to be an unaffected carrier like each parent a 25% chance to be unaffected and not be a carrier.
 There are currently no treatments known to prevent or slow the progression of Troyer syndrome. Treatment aims to relieve symptoms of the disease and improve quality of life. Treatment for spasticity involves both exercise and medication, especially baclofen (Lioresal), which is used either orally or by intrathecal pump. Tizanidine, dantrolene (with precautions), and Botox have also been useful in reducing muscle spasticity. Daily physical therapy is recommended. Treatment may also include: Occupational therapy, assistive walking devices, and ankle-foot orthotics as needed Oxybutynin to reduce urinary urgency Antidepressants or mood stabilizers to manage emotional or mood disorders Additional information about the management of Troyer syndrome can be viewed on the GeneReviews Web site.
Troyer syndrome is one of more than 40 genetically-distinct neurological disorders known collectively as the hereditary spastic paraplegias. These disorders are characterized by their paramount feature of progressive muscle weakness and spasticity in the legs. Additional symptoms of Troyer syndrome (also called SPG20) include leg contractures, difficulty walking, speech disorders, drooling, atrophy of the hand muscles, developmental delays, fluctuating emotions, and short stature. Onset is typically in early childhood, and symptoms gradually worsen over time. Troyer syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder (meaning that both parents must carry and pass on the defective gene that produces the illness) that results from a mutation in the spastic paraplegia gene (SPGP20) located in chromosome 13 that results in loss of the spartin proteins. The disease was first observed in Amish families in Ohio. Diagnosis is made by specialized genetic testing.
There are no specific treatments to prevent or slow the progressive degeneration seen in Troyer syndrome. Symptomatic therapy includes antispasmodic drugs and physical therapy to improve muscle strength and maintain range of motion in the legs. Assistive devices may be needed to help with walking.
Prognosis varies, although the disease is progressive. Some patients may have a mild form of the disease while others eventually lose the ability to walk normally. Troyer syndrome does not shorten the normal life span.
The NINDS supports research on genetic disorders such as the hereditary spastic paraplegias. A gene for Troyer syndrome has been identified and others may be identified in the future. Understanding how these genes cause Troyer syndrome and the hereditary spastic paraplegias in general will lead to ways to prevent, treat, and cure these disorders.
About 20 cases of Troyer syndrome have been reported in the Old Order Amish population of Ohio. It has not been found outside this population.
Troyer syndrome is caused by a mutation in the SPG20 gene. The SPG20 gene provides instructions for producing a protein called spartin, whose function is not entirely understood. Researchers believe that spartin may be involved in a variety of cell functions, from breaking down proteins to transporting materials from the cell surface into the cell (endocytosis). Spartin is found in a wide range of body tissues, including the nervous system.