Tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated periodic syndrome (TRAPS) is an inherited condition characterized by recurrent episodes of fever. Episodes can begin at any age but most often begin in early childhood. Fevers typically last about 3 weeks but can last from a few days to a few months. The amount of time between episodes may vary from weeks to years. Episodes usually occur spontaneously, but are sometimes brought on by a variety of triggers (such as injury, infection, or stress). Symptoms during fever episodes may include abdominal, muscle or joint pains; skin rashes (usually on the limbs); puffiness around the eyes; and inflammation in various areas of the body. Some people develop amyloidosis. TRAPS is caused by mutations in the TNFRSF1A gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Treatment may include systemic corticosteroids at the beginning of an episode to reduce its severity and duration.
is a genetic condition caused by mutations in a gene called TNFRSF1A. This gene gives the body instructions to make a protein called tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR1). This protein exists in cell membranes where it binds to another protein called tumor necrosis factor (TNF). The binding sends signals that tell the cells to trigger inflammation (producing immune system proteins) or self-destruct. Most TNFRSF1A gene mutations that cause TRAPS result in incorrectly-shaped TNFR1 proteins, which become trapped in cells and cannot reach the surface to bind with TNF. The trapped proteins then clump together and are thought to trigger other pathways involved in causing inflammation. Affected people typically have a mutation in only one of their 2 copies of the TNFRSF1A gene, so some normal TNFR1 proteins are still produced, leading to even more inflammation. This is what leads to excess inflammation in people with TRAPS. It is unclear if abnormalities in the cells' ability to self-destruct also plays a role in causing the features of TRAPS.
TRAPS is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that having a mutation in only one of the 2 copies of the responsible gene is enough to cause signs and symptoms of the condition. When a person with an autosomal dominant condition has children, each child has a 50% (1 in 2) chance to inherit the mutated copy of the gene. In many cases, a person with TRAPS inherits the condition from an affected parent. In other cases, the mutation occurs for the first time in the affected person and is not inherited from a parent. For unknown reasons, some people who inherit the mutated gene never develop features of TRAPS. When this occurs, a condition is said to have reduced penetrance.
 While there is no proven treatment for TRAPS, non steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) may be used to relieve symptoms of fever, and corticosteroids may be used to reduce severity of symptoms in most people. However, these medications typically don't decrease the frequency of attacks. Etanercept, a TNF inhibitor, has been shown to be effective but its efficacy tends to wane over time. Standard doses of etanercept twice a week have been shown to decrease the frequency, duration, and severity of attacks in some people and it may also reverse or slow the progression of amyloidosis. More studies are needed to evaluate this medication for TRAPS. Additional information about the treatment of TRAPS can be viewed on Medscape's Web site.
Tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated periodic syndrome (commonly known as TRAPS) is a condition characterized by recurrent episodes of fever. These fevers typically last about 3 weeks but can last from a few days to a few months. The frequency of the episodes varies greatly among affected individuals; fevers can occur anywhere between every 6 weeks to every few years. Some individuals can go many years without having a fever episode. Fever episodes usually occur spontaneously, but sometimes they can be brought on by a variety of triggers, such as minor injury, infection, stress, exercise, or hormonal changes.  During episodes of fever, people with TRAPS can have additional signs and symptoms. These include abdominal and muscle pain and a spreading skin rash, typically found on the limbs. Affected individuals may also experience puffiness or swelling in the skin around the eyes (periorbital edema); joint pain; and inflammation in various areas of the body including the eyes, heart muscle, certain joints, throat, or mucous membranes such as the moist lining of the mouth and digestive tract. Occasionally, people with TRAPS develop amyloidosis, an abnormal buildup of a protein called amyloid in the kidneys that can lead to kidney failure. It is estimated that 15 to 20 percent of people with TRAPS develop amyloidosis, typically in mid-adulthood.  The fever episodes characteristic of TRAPS can begin at any age, from infancy to late adulthood, but most people have their first episode in childhood.
TRAPS has an estimated prevalence of one per million individuals; it is the second most common inherited recurrent fever syndrome, following a similar condition called familial Mediterranean fever. More than 1,000 people worldwide have been diagnosed with TRAPS.
TRAPS is caused by mutations in the TNFRSF1A gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR1). This protein is found within the membrane of cells, where it attaches (binds) to another protein called tumor necrosis factor (TNF). This binding sends signals that can trigger the cell either to initiate inflammation or to self-destruct. Signaling within the cell initiates a pathway that turns on a protein called nuclear factor kappa B that triggers inflammation and leads to the production of immune system proteins called cytokines. The self-destruction of the cell (apoptosis) is initiated when the TNFR1 protein, bound to the TNF protein, is brought into the cell and triggers a process known as the caspase cascade.  Most TNFRSF1A gene mutations that cause TRAPS result in a TNFR1 protein that is folded into an incorrect 3-dimensional shape. These misfolded proteins are trapped within the cell and are not able to get to the cell surface to interact with TNF. Inside the cell, these proteins clump together and are thought to trigger alternative pathways that initiate inflammation. The clumps of protein constantly activate these alternative inflammation pathways, leading to excess inflammation in people with TRAPS. Additionally, because only one copy of the TNFRSF1A gene has a mutation, some normal TNFR1 proteins are produced and can bind to the TNF protein, leading to additional inflammation. It is unclear if disruption of the apoptosis pathway plays a role in the signs and symptoms of TRAPS.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. However, some people who inherit the altered gene never develop features of TRAPS. (This situation is known as reduced penetrance.) It is unclear why some people with a mutated gene develop the disease and other people with the mutated gene do not.  In most cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of TRAPS:  - Genetic Testing Registry: TNF receptor-associated periodic fever syndrome (TRAPS)  - University College London: National Amyloidosis Center (UK)   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care