Turner syndrome is a genetic disorder that affects a girl's development. The cause is a missing or incomplete X chromosome. Girls who have it are short, and their ovaries don't work properly.    Other physical features typical of Turner syndrome are       -  Short, "webbed" neck with folds of skin from tops of shoulders to sides of neck    -  Low hairline in the back    -  Low-set ears    -  Swollen hands and feet       Most women with Turner syndrome are infertile. They are at risk for health difficulties such as high blood pressure, kidney problems, diabetes, cataracts, osteoporosis, and thyroid problems.    Doctors diagnose Turner syndrome based on symptoms and a genetic test. Sometimes it is found in prenatal testing. There is no cure for Turner syndrome, but there are some treatments for the symptoms. Growth hormone often helps girls reach heights that are close to average. Hormone replacement can help start sexual development. Assisted reproduction techniques can help some women with Turner syndrome get pregnant.    NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
Turner syndrome is a chromosomal disorder that affects development in females. It is characterized by a person having one X chromosome in each cell (females without Turner syndrome have two X chromosomes in each cell). Signs and symptoms may include short stature; premature ovarian failure; a "webbed" neck; a low hairline at the back of the neck; and swelling (lymphedema) of the hands and feet. Some people with Turner syndrome have skeletal abnormalities, kidney problems, and/or a congenital heart defect. Most affected girls and women have normal intelligence, but some have developmental delays, learning disabilities, and/or behavior problems. Turner syndrome is typically not inherited, but it can be inherited in rare cases. Treatment may include growth hormone therapy for short stature and estrogen therapy to help stimulate sexual development. While most women with Turner syndrome are infertile, assisted reproductive techniques can help some women become pregnant.
 Turner syndrome is caused by partial or complete loss of one of the X chromosomes in cells of females. Females without Turner syndrome have 2 full X chromosome in all of their cells (and males have one X chromosome and one Y chromosome). The missing genetic material affects development before and after birth. Most females with Turner syndrome are missing a full X chromosome in all of their cells (also called monosomy X). This form results from a random error in an egg or sperm cell prior to conception. Some females with Turner syndrome have two X chromosomes, but one of them is missing a piece (has a deletion). Depending on the specific gene(s) that are missing, the features of Turner syndrome may result. A deletion may occur sporadically (not inherited) or may be inherited from a parent. Mosaic Turner syndrome (when some cells have one X chromosome and some have two sex chromosomes) is caused by a random error in early fetal development (shortly after conception). It is still unclear exactly which genes on the X chromosome are associated with each feature of Turner syndrome. It is known that the SHOX gene on the X chromosome is important for growth and bone development. A missing copy of this gene is thought to result in the short stature and skeletal abnormalities in many affected women.
 Most cases of Turner syndrome are not inherited. Most commonly, Turner syndrome occurs due to a random event during the formation of an egg or sperm cell in a parent (prior to conception). For example, if an egg or sperm cell mistakenly loses a sex chromosome, and joins at conception with an egg or sperm containing an X chromosome, the resulting child will have a single X chromosome in each cell. Mosaic Turner syndrome, occurring when a person has some cells with one X chromosome and some cells with two sex chromosomes, is also not inherited. This also occurs due to a random event, during early fetal development rather than before conception. In rare cases, Turner syndrome may be caused by a missing piece (partial deletion) of the X chromosome. A deletion can be inherited from a parent. Genetic testing of an affected fetus or child can identify the type of Turner syndrome present and may help to estimate the risk of recurrence. People with questions about genetic testing or recurrence risks for Turner syndrome are encouraged to speak with a genetic counselor or other genetics professional.
Parsonage Turner syndrome is characterized by the sudden onset of shoulder and upper arm pain followed by progressive (worsening over time) weakness and/or atrophy of the affected area. Although the exact cause is unknown, researchers believe that most cases are due to an autoimmune response following exposure to an illness or environmental factor. Suspected triggers include viral and bacterial infections; surgery; vaccinations; injury; childbirth; strenuous exercise; certain medical procedures; and various health conditions. Treatment is symptomatic and may include pain relievers and physical therapy.
 Parsonage Turner syndrome is usually characterized by the sudden onset of severe pain in the shoulder and upper arm, which is often described as sharp or throbbing. In some cases, the pain may extend to the neck, lower arm and/or hand on the affected side. Rarely, both sides of the body are involved. Affected people typically experience constant pain that may become worse with movement. Intense pain can last from a few hours to several weeks at which point the pain usually begins to subside; however, mild pain may continue for a year or longer. As the pain subsides, it is typically replaced by progressive (worsening over time) weakness of the affected area, ranging from mild weakness to nearly complete paralysis. Affected people may also experience muscle wasting (atrophy); absent or reduced reflexes; and/or loss of sensation. In some cases, nerves and muscles outside of the shoulder and upper arm region may be affected, as well.
 The exact cause of Parsonage Turner syndrome (PTS) is unknown. Researchers suspect that most cases are due to an autoimmune response following exposure to an illness or environmental factor. In many cases, no triggering event or underlying cause can be identified. Factors known to trigger PTS include: Infections (both viral and bacterial) Surgery Vaccinations Childbirth Certain medical procedures, such as a spinal tap or imaging studies that require administration of radiologic dye Strenuous exercise Certain medical conditions, including connective tissue disorders and autoimmune disorders Injury Some researchers believe that PTS is a multifactorial condition, which means that it is caused by both environmental and genetic factors. In this case, a person may have a genetic susceptibility to PTS due to one or more genes, but won't develop the condition unless they are exposed to certain environmental triggers (such as those listed above).
 Parsonage Turner syndrome, which is also known as idiopathic neuralgic amyotrophy, is not inherited. However, an inherited form of neuralgic amyotrophy does exist, which is passed down through families in an autosomal dominant manner. For more information on hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy, please click here.
 A diagnosis of Parsonage Turner syndrome (PTS) is often suspected based on the presence of characteristic signs and symptoms. Specialized tests may be recommended to further investigate the shoulder pain and/or muscle weakness and to rule out other conditions that can cause similar features. These tests may include nerve conduction studies (tests that determine the ability of a specific nerve to relay a message to the brain), electromyography, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI scan) and/or an X-ray.
 Treatment for Parsonage Turner syndrome (PTS) varies based on the signs and symptoms present in each person. For example, pain medications may be prescribed depending on the severity of the nerve pain. Other techniques for pain management include application of heat or cold and transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (a method of pain relief in which a special device transmits low-voltage electrical impulses through electrodes on the skin to an area of the body that is in pain). Many affected people undergo physical therapy and/or occupational therapy to maintain muscle strength and range of motion of affected joints once the pain begins to subside. Surgeries to restore movement and function to the shoulder muscles and joint may be considered if other treatment options are not effective.
This condition occurs in about 1 in 2,500 newborn girls worldwide, but it is much more common among pregnancies that do not survive to term (miscarriages and stillbirths).
Turner syndrome is related to the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. People typically have two sex chromosomes in each cell: females have two X chromosomes, while males have one X chromosome and one Y chromosome. Turner syndrome results when one normal X chromosome is present in a female's cells and the other sex chromosome is missing or structurally altered. The missing genetic material affects development before and after birth.  About half of individuals with Turner syndrome have monosomy X, which means each cell in the individual's body has only one copy of the X chromosome instead of the usual two sex chromosomes. Turner syndrome can also occur if one of the sex chromosomes is partially missing or rearranged rather than completely absent. Some women with Turner syndrome have a chromosomal change in only some of their cells, which is known as mosaicism. Women with Turner syndrome caused by X chromosome mosaicism are said to have mosaic Turner syndrome.  Researchers have not determined which genes on the X chromosome are associated with most of the features of Turner syndrome. They have, however, identified one gene called SHOX that is important for bone development and growth. The loss of one copy of this gene likely causes short stature and skeletal abnormalities in women with Turner syndrome.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Turner syndrome:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Turner syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Ovarian Hypofunction  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Turner Syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care