Tyrosinemia type 1 is a genetic disorder characterized by elevated blood levels of the amino acid tyrosine, a building block of most proteins. This condition is caused by a shortage of the enzyme fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase, one of the enzymes required for the multi-step process that breaks down tyrosine. This enzyme shortage is caused by mutations in the FAH gene. Symptoms usually appear in the first few months of life and include failure to thrive, diarrhea, vomiting, jaundice, cabbage-like odor, and increased tendency to bleed (particularly nosebleeds). Tyrosinemia type I can lead to liver and kidney failure, problems affecting the nervous system, and an increased risk of liver cancer. This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Tyrosinemia type 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Aminoaciduria 90% Abnormality of bone mineral density 7.5% Abnormality of the spleen 7.5% Hepatomegaly 7.5% Abnormal bleeding - Abnormality of the abdominal wall - Acute hepatic failure - Ascites - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cirrhosis - Elevated alpha-fetoprotein - Elevated hepatic transaminases - Elevated urinary delta-aminolevulinic acid - Enlarged kidneys - Episodic peripheral neuropathy - Failure to thrive - Gastrointestinal hemorrhage - Glomerulosclerosis - Hepatocellular carcinoma - Hypermethioninemia - Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy - Hypertyrosinemia - Hypoglycemia - Hypophosphatemic rickets - Nephrocalcinosis - Pancreatic islet-cell hyperplasia - Paralytic ileus - Periodic paralysis - Renal Fanconi syndrome - Renal insufficiency - Splenomegaly - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 There is currently no cure for tyrosinemia type 1. Individuals with this condition need to be on a special diet restricted in two amino acids, tyrosine and phenylalanine, throughout life. Affected individuals may also be treated with a medication called nitisinone. Early diagnosis and prompt treatment are essential for an improved prognosis. Some individuals require a liver transplant if their liver disease is already advanced before treatment begins. Detailed information on the treatment of tyrosinemia type 1 is available from GeneReviews.
Tyrosinemia type 3 is a genetic disorder characterized by elevated blood levels of the amino acid tyrosine, a building block of most proteins. This condition is caused by a deficiency of the enzyme 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase, one of the enzymes required for the multi-step process that breaks down tyrosine. This enzyme shortage is caused by mutations in the HPD gene. Characteristic features include intellectual disability, seizures, and periodic loss of balance and coordination (intermittent ataxia). Tyrosinemia type 3 is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Tyrosinemia type 3. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) 4-Hydroxyphenylacetic aciduria - 4-Hydroxyphenylpyruvic aciduria - Abnormality of the liver - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Hypertyrosinemia - Intellectual disability, mild - Seizures - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Tyrosinemia is a genetic disorder characterized by disruptions in the multistep process that breaks down the amino acid tyrosine, a building block of most proteins. If untreated, tyrosine and its byproducts build up in tissues and organs, which can lead to serious health problems.  There are three types of tyrosinemia, which are each distinguished by their symptoms and genetic cause. Tyrosinemia type I, the most severe form of this disorder, is characterized by signs and symptoms that begin in the first few months of life. Affected infants fail to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive) due to poor food tolerance because high-protein foods lead to diarrhea and vomiting. Affected infants may also have yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice), a cabbage-like odor, and an increased tendency to bleed (particularly nosebleeds). Tyrosinemia type I can lead to liver and kidney failure, softening and weakening of the bones (rickets), and an increased risk of liver cancer (hepatocellular carcinoma). Some affected children have repeated neurologic crises that consist of changes in mental state, reduced sensation in the arms and legs (peripheral neuropathy), abdominal pain, and respiratory failure. These crises can last from 1 to 7 days. Untreated, children with tyrosinemia type I often do not survive past the age of 10.  Tyrosinemia type II can affect the eyes, skin, and mental development. Signs and symptoms often begin in early childhood and include eye pain and redness, excessive tearing, abnormal sensitivity to light (photophobia), and thick, painful skin on the palms of their hands and soles of their feet (palmoplantar hyperkeratosis). About 50 percent of individuals with tyrosinemia type II have some degree of intellectual disability.  Tyrosinemia type III is the rarest of the three types. The characteristic features of this type include intellectual disability, seizures, and periodic loss of balance and coordination (intermittent ataxia).  About 10 percent of newborns have temporarily elevated levels of tyrosine (transient tyrosinemia). In these cases, the cause is not genetic. The most likely causes are vitamin C deficiency or immature liver enzymes due to premature birth.
Worldwide, tyrosinemia type I affects about 1 in 100,000 individuals. This type is more common in Norway where 1 in 60,000 to 74,000 individuals are affected. Tyrosinemia type I is even more common in Quebec, Canada where it occurs in about 1 in 16,000 individuals. In the Saguenay-Lac St. Jean region of Quebec, tyrosinemia type I affects 1 in 1,846 people.  Tyrosinemia type II occurs in fewer than 1 in 250,000 individuals worldwide. Tyrosinemia type III is very rare; only a few cases have been reported.
Mutations in the FAH, TAT, and HPD genes can cause tyrosinemia types I, II, and III, respectively.  In the liver, enzymes break down tyrosine in a five step process, resulting in molecules that are either excreted by the kidneys or used to produce energy or make other substances in the body. The FAH gene provides instructions for the fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase enzyme, which is responsible for the final step of tyrosine breakdown. The enzyme produced from the TAT gene, called tyrosine aminotransferase enzyme, is involved at the first step in the process. The HPD gene provides instructions for making the 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase enzyme, which is responsible for the second step.  Mutations in the FAH, TAT, or HPD gene cause a decrease in the activity of one of the enzymes in the breakdown of tyrosine. As a result, tyrosine and its byproducts accumulate to toxic levels, which can cause damage and death to cells in the liver, kidneys, nervous system, and other organs.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of tyrosinemia:  - Baby's First Test: Tyrosinemia, Type I  - Baby's First Test: Tyrosinemia, Type II  - Baby's First Test: Tyrosinemia, Type III  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Tyrosinemia Type I  - Genetic Testing Registry: 4-Hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase deficiency  - Genetic Testing Registry: Tyrosinemia type 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Tyrosinemia type I  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Aminoaciduria   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care