Urachal cyst is a sac-like pocket of tissue that develops in the urachus, a primitive structure that connects the umbilical cord to the bladder in the developing baby. Although it normally disappears prior to birth, part of the urachus may remain in some people. Urachal cysts can develop at any age, but typically affect older children and adults. Urachal cysts are often not associated with any signs or symptoms unless there are complications such as infection. In these cases, symptoms may include abdominal pain, fever, pain with urination and/or hematuria. Treatment typically includes surgery to drain the cyst and/or remove the urachus.
 In most cases, urachal cysts are not associated with any signs or symptoms unless there are complications such as infection. Possible symptoms vary, but may include: Lower abdominal pain Fever Abdominal lump or mass Pain with urination Urinary tract infection Hematuria
 A urachal cyst occurs when a pocket of air or fluid develops in the urachus. Before birth, the urachus is a primitive structure that connects the umbilical cord to the bladder in the developing baby. The urachus normally disappears before birth, but part of the urachus may remain in some people after they are born. This can lead to urachal abnormalities such as urachal cysts.
 The diagnosis of a urachal cyst may be suspected based on the presence of characteristic signs and symptoms. The following tests may then be ordered to confirm the diagnosis: Ultrasound Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI scan) Computed Tomography (CT scan)
 In many cases, the diagnosis of a urachal cyst is only made when there are complications such as infection. Although some cases of infected urachal cysts have reportedly resolved without any intervention, surgical treatment is generally recommended which involves draining the cyst. Because there is a small risk that a urachal cyst may become malignant (cancerous), additional surgery is often performed to completely remove the urachus.
Urachal cancer is a rare type of bladder cancer, making up less than 1% of all bladder cancers. Only about 350 cases have been described in the medical literature to date. The urachus is a primitive structure which before birth connected the bellybutton and the bladder. This connection normally disappears before birth, but in some people remains.  Urachal cancers are classified as such based on location at the dome or anterior wall of the bladder and discovery of remnants of the urachus. Most urachal cancers are adenocarcinomas (cancers that develop from gland cells). Others may be sarcomas (which develop from connective tissue - such as leiomyosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and malignant fibrous histiocytoma), small cell carcinomas, transitional cell cancer, and mixed neoplasias. Most individuals with urachal cancer present with hematuria (blood in urine). Other symptoms may include abdominal pain, a palpable abdominal mass, mucinuria, and bacteriuria. Patients who present with early disease confined to the urachus have a good prognosis when treated with partial cystectomy, umbilicotomy, and urachal resection. The prognosis for those with advanced disease is less promising.
 Surgical resection in the form of partial (segmental) or radical cystoprostatectomy is the main form of treatment. However, similar results are seen with a conservative surgery that involves partial cystectomy with umbilicotomy and removal of the urachus. The role of chemotherapy and radiation therapy for the treatment of urachal cancer is unclear, although some studies show that chemotherapy can induce objective response in some cases. Chemotherapy regimens that may be used include: single-agent 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), 5-FU and cisplatin, 5-FU, lomustine and vincristine, taxol and cisplatin, platinum and etoposide, and MVAC (methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, cisplatin) alone or in conjunction with radiation therapy.