Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) is a disorder that usually occurs when an  E. coli bacterial infection in the digestive system produces toxic substances that destroy red blood cells. Symptoms include vomiting and diarrhea, fever, lethargy, and weakness. In severe cases it can lead to kidney failure or death. While this condition is most common in children, it often has a more complicated presentation in adults. Treatment may include dialysis, corticosteroids, transfusions of packed red blood cells and plasmapheresis.   Hemolytic uremic syndrome should be distinguished from atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS). The two conditions have different causes and different signs and symptoms.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Hemolytic uremic syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Acute kidney injury - Anuria - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cognitive impairment - Coma - Decreased serum complement C3 - Decreased serum complement factor B - Decreased serum complement factor H - Decreased serum complement factor I - Diarrhea - Dysphasia - Elevated serum creatinine - Fever - Hemiparesis - Hemolytic-uremic syndrome - Hyperlipidemia - Hypertension - Increased blood urea nitrogen (BUN) - Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia - Purpura - Reticulocytosis - Schistocytosis - Seizures - Thrombocytopenia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Hemolytic uremic syndrome often occurs after a gastrointestinal infections with E. coli bacteria (Escherichia coli 0157:H7). The condition has also been linked to other gastrointestinal infections, including shigella and salmonella, as well as infections outside of the gastrointestinal system. The condition results when the bacteria lodge in the digestive tract and produce toxins that can enter the bloodstream. The toxins travel through the bloodstream and can destroy blood cells, causing acute kidney injury.
Hemolytic uremic syndrome, atypical, childhood is a disease that causes abnormal blood clots to form in small blood vessels in the kidneys. These clots can cause serious medical problems if they restrict or block blood flow, including hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and kidney failure. It is often caused by a combination of environmental and genetic factors. Genetic factors involve genes that code for proteins that help control the complement system (part of your bodys immune system). Environmental factors include viral or bacterial infections, certain medications (such as anticancer drugs), chronic diseases, cancers, and organ transplantation.  Most cases are sporadic. Less than 20 percent of all cases have been reported to run in families. When the disorder is familial, it can have an autosomal dominant or an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome differs from a more common condition called typical hemolytic-uremic syndrome. The two disorders have different causes and symptoms.
Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome (aHUS) is a disease that causes abnormal blood clots to form in small blood vessels in the kidneys. These clots can cause serious medical problems if they restrict or block blood flow, including hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and kidney failure. It can occur at any age and is often caused by a combination of environmental and genetic factors. Genetic factors involve genes that code for proteins that help control the complement system (part of your bodys immune system). Environmental factors include certain medications (such as anticancer drugs), chronic diseases (e.g., systemic sclerosis and malignant hypertension), viral or bacterial infections, cancers, organ transplantation, and pregnancy.  Most cases are sporadic. Less than 20 percent of all cases have been reported to run in families. When the disorder is familial, it can have an autosomal dominant or an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome differs from a more common condition called typical hemolytic-uremic syndrome. The two disorders have different causes and different signs and symptoms.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Acute kidney injury - Anuria - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Cognitive impairment - Coma - Decreased serum complement C3 - Decreased serum complement factor B - Decreased serum complement factor H - Decreased serum complement factor I - Diarrhea - Dysphasia - Elevated serum creatinine - Fever - Hemiparesis - Hemolytic-uremic syndrome - Hyperlipidemia - Hypertension - Increased blood urea nitrogen (BUN) - Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia - Purpura - Reticulocytosis - Schistocytosis - Seizures - Thrombocytopenia - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 GeneTests lists the names of laboratories that are performing genetic testing for atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome. To view the contact information for the clinical laboratories conducting testing click here and follow the "testing" link pertaining to each gene. Please note:  Most of the laboratories listed through GeneTests do not accept direct contact from patients and their families; therefore, if you are interested in learning more, you will need to work with a health care provider or a genetics professional.  In the Genetic Services section of this letter we provide a list of online resources that can assist you in locating a genetics professional near you.
Hemolytic uremic syndrome, or HUS, is a kidney condition that happens when red blood cells are destroyed and block the kidneys' filtering system. Red blood cells contain hemoglobinan iron-rich protein that gives blood its red color and carries oxygen from the lungs to all parts of the body.
                
When the kidneys and glomerulithe tiny units within the kidneys where blood is filteredbecome clogged with the damaged red blood cells, they are unable to do their jobs. If the kidneys stop functioning, a child can develop acute kidney injurythe sudden and temporary loss of kidney function. Hemolytic uremic syndrome is the most common cause of acute kidney injury in children.
The most common cause of hemolytic uremic syndrome in children is an Escherichia coli (E. coli) infection of the digestive system. The digestive system is made up of the gastrointestinal, or GI, tracta series of hollow organs joined in a long, twisting tube from the mouth to the anusand other organs that help the body break down and absorb food.
                
Normally, harmless strains, or types, of E. coli are found in the intestines and are an important part of digestion. However, if a child becomes infected with the O157:H7 strain of E. coli, the bacteria will lodge in the digestive tract and produce toxins that can enter the bloodstream. The toxins travel through the bloodstream and can destroy the red blood cells. E.coli O157:H7 can be found in
                
- undercooked meat, most often ground beef  - unpasteurized, or raw, milk  - unwashed, contaminated raw fruits and vegetables  - contaminated juice  - contaminated swimming pools or lakes
                
Less common causes, sometimes called atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome, can include
                
- taking certain medications, such as chemotherapy  - having other viral or bacterial infections  - inheriting a certain type of hemolytic uremicsyndrome that runs in families
                
More information about foodborne illnesses and the digestive system is provided in the NIDDK health topic, foodborne illnesses.
A child with hemolytic uremic syndrome may develop signs and symptoms similar to those seen with gastroenteritisan inflammation of the lining of the stomach, small intestine, and large intestine such as
                
- vomiting  - bloody diarrhea  - abdominal pain  - fever and chills  - headache
                
As the infection progresses, the toxins released in the intestine begin to destroy red blood cells. When the red blood cells are destroyed, the child may experience the signs and symptoms of anemiaa condition in which red blood cells are fewer or smaller than normal, which prevents the body's cells from getting enough oxygen.
                
Signs and symptoms of anemia may include
                
- fatigue, or feeling tired  - weakness  - fainting  - paleness
                
As the damaged red blood cells clog the glomeruli, the kidneys may become damaged and make less urine. When damaged, the kidneys work harder to remove wastes and extra fluid from the blood, sometimes leading to acute kidney injury.
                
Other signs and symptoms of hemolytic uremic syndrome may include bruising and seizures.
                
When hemolytic uremic syndrome causes acute kidney injury, a child may have the following signs and symptoms:
                
- edemaswelling, most often in the legs, feet, or ankles and less often in the hands or face  - albuminuriawhen a child's urine has high levels of albumin, the main protein in the blood  - decreased urine output  - hypoalbuminemiawhen a child's blood has low levels of albumin  - blood in the urine
                

                
Seek Immediate Care   Parents or caretakers should seek immediate care for a child experiencing any urgent symptoms, such as   - unusual bleeding   - swelling   - extreme fatigue   - decreased urine output   - unexplained bruises
Most children who develop hemolytic uremic syndrome and its complications recover without permanent damage to their health.1
                
However, children with hemolytic uremic syndrome may have serious and sometimes life-threatening complications, including
                
- acute kidney injury  - high blood pressure  - blood-clotting problems that can lead to bleeding  - seizures  - heart problems  - chronic, or long lasting, kidney disease  - stroke  - coma
A health care provider will treat a child with hemolytic uremic syndrome by addressing
                
- urgent symptoms and preventing complications  - acute kidney injury  - chronic kidney disease (CKD)
                
In most cases, health care providers do not treat children with hemolytic uremic syndrome with antibiotics unless they have infections in other areas of the body. With proper management, most children recover without long-term health problems.2
                
Treating Urgent Symptoms and Preventing Complications
                
A health care provider will treat a child's urgent symptoms and try to prevent complications by
                
- observing the child closely in the hospital  - replacing minerals, such as potassium and salt, and fluids through an intravenous (IV) tube  - giving the child red blood cells and platelets cells in the blood that help with clottingthrough an IV  - giving the child IV nutrition  - treating high blood pressure with medications
                
Treating Acute Kidney Injury
                
If necessary, a health care provider will treat acute kidney injury with dialysisthe process of filtering wastes and extra fluid from the body with an artificial kidney. The two forms of dialysis are hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis. Most children with acute kidney injury need dialysis for a short time only.
                
Treating Chronic Kidney Disease
                
Some children may sustain significant kidney damage that slowly develops into CKD. Children who develop CKD must receive treatment to replace the work the kidneys do. The two types of treatment are dialysis and transplantation.
                
In most cases, health care providers treat CKD with a kidney transplant. A kidney transplant is surgery to place a healthy kidney from someone who has just died or a living donor, most often a family member, into a person's body to take over the job of the failing kidney. Though some children receive a kidney transplant before their kidneys fail completely, many children begin with dialysis to stay healthy until they can have a transplant.
                
More information is provided in the NIDDK health topic, Treatment Methods for Kidney Failure in Children.
Parents and caregivers can help prevent childhood hemolytic uremic syndrome due to E. coli O157:H7 by
                
- avoiding unclean swimming areas  - avoiding unpasteurized milk, juice, and cider  - cleaning utensils and food surfaces often  - cooking meat to an internal temperature of at least 160 F  - defrosting meat in the microwave or refrigerator  - keeping children out of pools if they have had diarrhea  - keeping raw foods separate  - washing hands before eating  - washing hands well after using the restroom and after changing diapers
                
When a child is taking medications that may cause hemolytic uremic syndrome, it is important that the parent or caretaker watch for symptoms and report any changes in the child's condition to the health care provider as soon as possible.
At the beginning of the illness, children with hemolytic uremic syndrome may need IV nutrition or supplements to help maintain fluid balance in the body. Some children may need to follow a low-salt diet to help prevent swelling and high blood pressure.
                
Health care providers will encourage children with hemolytic uremic syndrome to eat when they are hungry. Most children who completely recover and do not have permanent kidney damage can return to their usual diet.