Alcohol, also known as ethanol, is a chemical found in beverages like beer, wine, and distilled spirits such as whiskey, vodka, and rum. Through a process called fermentation, yeast converts the sugars naturally found in grains and grapes into the alcohol that is in beer and wine. Another process, called distillation, concentrates alcohol in the drink making it stronger, producing what are known as distilled spirits.
Its not always obvious that someone drinks too much. For older adults, clues to a possible alcohol problem include memory loss, depression, anxiety, poor appetite, unexplained bruises, falls, sleeping problems, and inattention to cleanliness or appearance. Answering "yes" to at least one of the following questions is also a sign of a possible drinking problem: - Have you ever felt you should cut down on your drinking?  - Have people annoyed you by criticizing your drinking?  - Have you ever felt bad or guilty about your drinking?  - Have you ever had a drink first thing in the morning to steady your nerves or get rid of a hangover? Have you ever felt you should cut down on your drinking? Have people annoyed you by criticizing your drinking? Have you ever felt bad or guilty about your drinking? Have you ever had a drink first thing in the morning to steady your nerves or get rid of a hangover? If you answered yes to any of these questions, talk with your health care provider. Also seek help if you feel you are having drinking-related problems with your health, relationships, or work.
There is not one right treatment for everyone with alcohol problems. In general, many people need more than one kind of treatment. Medicines can help people with alcohol use disorder quit drinking. Meeting with a therapist or substance-abuse counselor or with a support group may also help. Support from family and friends is important, too. A doctor can help a person decide on the best treatment. Making a change sooner rather than later makes treatment more likely to succeed. Learn more about treatment options for alcohol problems.  Learn more about available types of alcohol treatment.  (Watch the video to learn more about getting help for alcohol use disorder (AUD). To enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. To reduce the video, press the Escape (Esc) button on your keyboard.)
Many people with alcohol problems find it helpful to talk with others who have faced similar problems. Mutual help groups, such as Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) 12-step programs, help people recover from alcohol use disorder. AA meetings are open to anyone who wants to stop drinking. Attending mutual-help groups is beneficial for many people who want to stop drinking. Many people continue to go to support/mutual help groups even after medical treatment for their alcohol problems ends. There are other mutual help groups available such as Smart Recovery, Life Ring, and Moderation Management.  Learn more about available types of treatment for alcohol problems.