Usher syndrome is an inherited disease that causes serious hearing loss and retinitis pigmentosa, an eye disorder that causes your vision to get worse over time. It is the most common condition that affects both hearing and vision.    There are three types of Usher syndrome:       - People with type I are deaf from birth and have severe balance problems from a young age. Vision problems usually start by age 10 and lead to blindness.    - People with type II have moderate to severe hearing loss and normal balance. Vision problems start in the early teens and get worse more slowly than in type I.    - People with type III are born with normal hearing and near-normal balance but develop vision problems and then hearing loss.       There is no cure. Tools such as hearing aids or cochlear implants can help some people. Training such as Braille instruction, low-vision services, or auditory training can also help.    NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders
Usher syndrome is a genetic condition characterized by hearing loss or deafness, and progressive vision loss due to retinitis pigmentosa. Three major types of Usher syndrome have been described - types I, II, and III.  The different types are distinguished by their severity and the age when signs and symptoms appear. All three types are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner, which means both copies of the disease-causing gene in each cell have mutations.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Usher syndrome, type 1B. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Absent vestibular function - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Heterogeneous - Motor delay - Rod-cone dystrophy - Sensorineural hearing impairment - Undetectable electroretinogram - Visual loss - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Usher syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that a person must have a change (mutation) in both copies of the disease-causing gene in each cell to have Usher syndrome. One mutated copy is typically inherited from each parent, who are each referred to as a carrier. Carriers of an autosomal recessive condition usually do not have any signs or symptoms. When two carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) chance to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) chance to be an unaffected carrier like each parent, and a 25% chance to not be a carrier and not be affected.
Usher syndrome is a genetic condition characterized by hearing loss or deafness, and progressive vision loss due to retinitis pigmentosa. Three major types of Usher syndrome have been described - types I, II, and III.  The different types are distinguished by their severity and the age when signs and symptoms appear. All three types are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner, which means both copies of the disease-causing gene in each cell have mutations.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Usher syndrome, type 2C. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal recessive inheritance - Congenital sensorineural hearing impairment - Rod-cone dystrophy - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Usher syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that a person must have a change (mutation) in both copies of the disease-causing gene in each cell to have Usher syndrome. One mutated copy is typically inherited from each parent, who are each referred to as a carrier. Carriers of an autosomal recessive condition usually do not have any signs or symptoms. When two carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) chance to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) chance to be an unaffected carrier like each parent, and a 25% chance to not be a carrier and not be affected.
Usher syndrome is thought to be responsible for 3 percent to 6 percent of all childhood deafness and about 50 percent of deaf-blindness in adults. Usher syndrome type I is estimated to occur in at least 4 per 100,000 people. It may be more common in certain ethnic populations, such as people with Ashkenazi (central and eastern European) Jewish ancestry and the Acadian population in Louisiana. Type II is thought to be the most common form of Usher syndrome, although the frequency of this type is unknown. Type III Usher syndrome accounts for only a small percentage of all Usher syndrome cases in most populations. This form of the condition is more common in the Finnish population, however, where it accounts for about 40 percent of all cases.
Mutations in the ADGRV1, CDH23, CLRN1, MYO7A, PCDH15, USH1C, USH1G, and USH2A genes can cause Usher syndrome.  The genes related to Usher syndrome provide instructions for making proteins that play important roles in normal hearing, balance, and vision. They function in the development and maintenance of hair cells, which are sensory cells in the inner ear that help transmit sound and motion signals to the brain. In the retina, these genes are also involved in determining the structure and function of light-sensing cells called rods and cones. In some cases, the exact role of these genes in hearing and vision is unknown. Most of the mutations responsible for Usher syndrome lead to a loss of hair cells in the inner ear and a gradual loss of rods and cones in the retina. Degeneration of these sensory cells causes hearing loss, balance problems, and vision loss characteristic of this condition.  Usher syndrome type I can result from mutations in the CDH23, MYO7A, PCDH15, USH1C, or USH1G gene. At least two other unidentified genes also cause this form of Usher syndrome.  Usher syndrome type II is caused by mutations in at least four genes. Only two of these genes, ADGRV1 and USH2A, have been identified.  Mutations in at least two genes are responsible for Usher syndrome type III; however, CLRN1 is the only gene that has been identified.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Usher syndrome:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Usher Syndrome Type I  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Usher Syndrome Type II  - Genetic Testing Registry: Usher syndrome type 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Usher syndrome, type 1  - Genetic Testing Registry: Usher syndrome, type 3A  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Retinitis Pigmentosa   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care