VACTERL association is a non-random association of birth defects that affects multiple parts of the body. The term VACTERL is an acronym with each letter representing the first letter of one of the more common findings seen in affected individuals: (V) = vertebral abnormalities; (A) = anal atresia; (C) = cardiac (heart) defects; (T) = tracheal anomalies including tracheoesophageal (TE) fistula; (E) = esophageal atresia; (R) = renal (kidney) and radial (thumb side of hand) abnormalities; and (L) = other limb abnormalities. Other features may include (less frequently) growth deficiencies and failure to thrive; facial asymmetry (hemifacial microsomia); external ear malformations; intestinal malrotation; and genital anomalies. Intelligence is usually normal. The exact cause of VACTERL association is unknown; most cases occur randomly, for no apparent reason. In rare cases, VACTERL association has occurred in more than one family member.
 A specific, consistent, genetic abnormality has not been identified in individuals with VACTERL association. A very few sporadic cases of VACTERL association have been associated with mutations in FGF8, HOXD13, ZIC3, PTEN, FANCB, FOXF1, and TRAP1 genes and mitochondrial DNA. When a condition is defined as being an "association", it means that it is made up of a series of specific features which have been found to occur together more often than it would happen due to chance alone, but for which no specific cause has been determined (idiopathic). For indiviuals with VACTERL association, the risk for it to recur in either a sibling or a child is usually quoted as being around 1% (1 in 100). There are very few reports of recurrence of the VACTERL association in families in the literature. Researchers have stated that when dysmorphic features, growth abnormalities, and/or learning disability are present in addition to the features of VACTERL association, it may actually be due to a syndrome or chromosome abnormality; if this is the case, the recurrence risk for a family member would be the risk that is associated with that specific diagnosis. Genetic disorders which have features in common with VACTERL association include Feingold syndrome, CHARGE syndrome, Fanconi anemia, Townes-Brocks syndrome, and Pallister-Hall syndrome. It has also been recognized that there is a two to threefold increase in the incidence of multiple congenital malformations (with features that have overlapped with those of VACTERL association) in children of diabetic mothers.
 Because there is no known cause of VACTERL association, clinical genetic testing is not available for the condition. If an individual has a specific diagnosis of another syndrome or genetic condition in addition to the features of VACTERL association, genetic testing may be available for that condition. GeneTests lists the names of laboratories that are performing genetic testing for VACTERL association. Although no clinical laboratories are listed for this condition, there are some research laboratories performing genetic testing; to see a list of these laboratories, click here. Please note: Most of the laboratories listed through GeneTests do not accept direct contact from patients and their families; therefore, if you are interested in learning more, you will need to work with a health care provider or a genetics professional. How is VACTERL association diagnosed? Prenatal diagnosis of VACTERL association can be challenging because certain component features of the condition can be difficult to detect prior to birth. Therefore, the diagnosis of VACTERL association is typically based on features that are seen when a baby is born or in the first few days of life. The diagnosis is based on having at least three of the following features (which make up the acronym VACTERL): vertebral defects, commonly accompanied by rib anomalies; imperforate anus or anal atresia; cardiac (heart) defects; tracheo-esophageal fistula with or without esophageal atresia; renal (kidney) anomalies including renal agenesis, horseshoe kidney, and cystic and/or dysplastic kidneys; and limb abnormalities. Additional types of abnormalities have also been reported in affected individuals and may be used as clues in considering a diagnosis of other conditions with overlapping features. Depending on the features present, some other conditions that may be considered when diagnosing a child who has features of VACTERL association (differential diagnosis) may include Baller-Gerold syndrome, CHARGE syndrome, Currarino disease, 22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome, Fanconi anemia, Feingold syndrome, Fryns syndrome, MURCS association, oculo-auriculo-vertebral spectrum, Opitz G/BBB syndrome, Pallister-Hall syndrome, Townes-Brocks syndrome, and VACTERL with hydrocephalus.
VACTERL association occurs in 1 in 10,000 to 40,000 newborns.
VACTERL association is a complex condition that may have different causes in different people. In some people, the condition is likely caused by the interaction of multiple genetic and environmental factors. Some possible genetic and environmental influences have been identified and are being studied.  The developmental abnormalities characteristic of VACTERL association develop before birth. The disruption to fetal development that causes VACTERL association likely occurs early in development, resulting in birth defects that affect multiple body systems. It is unclear why the features characteristic of VACTERL association group together in affected individuals.
Most cases of VACTERL association are sporadic, which means they occur in people with no history of the condition in their family. Rarely, families have multiple people affected with VACTERL association. A few affected individuals have family members with one or two features, but not enough signs to be diagnosed with the condition. In these families, the features of VACTERL association often do not have a clear pattern of inheritance. Multiple genetic and environmental factors likely play a part in determining the risk of developing this condition and how severe the condition will be in an individual.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of VACTERL association:  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Tracheoesophageal Fistula and Esophageal Atresia Repair   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care