Mitral valve prolapse (MVP) occurs when one of your heart's valves doesn't work properly. The flaps of the valve are "floppy" and don't close tightly. Most people who have the condition are born with it. It also tends to run in families.    Most of the time, MVP doesn't cause any problems. Rarely, blood can leak the wrong way through the floppy valve. This can cause       - Palpitations (feelings that your heart is skipping a beat, fluttering, or beating too hard or too fast)    - Shortness of breath    - Cough    - Fatigue, dizziness, or anxiety    - Migraine headaches    - Chest discomfort       Most people who have mitral valve prolapse (MVP) don't need treatment because they don't have symptoms and complications. If you need treatment for MVP, medicines can help relieve symptoms or prevent complications. Very few people will need surgery to repair or replace the mitral valve.    MVP puts you at risk for infective endocarditis, a kind of heart infection. To prevent it, doctors used to prescribe antibiotics before dental work or certain surgeries. Now, only people at high risk of endocarditis need the antibiotics.    NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Mitral valve prolapse, familial, X-linked. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Disproportionate tall stature - High palate - Mitral regurgitation - Mitral valve prolapse - Pectus excavatum - Reversed usual vertebral column curves - Striae distensae - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The exact cause of mitral valve prolapse (MVP) isn't known. Most people who have the condition are born with it. MVP tends to run in families. Also, it's more common in people who are born with connective tissue disorders, such as Marfan syndrome.
                
In people who have MVP, the mitral valve may be abnormal in the following ways:
                
The valve flaps may be too large and thick.
                
The valve flaps may be "floppy." The tissue of the flaps and their supporting "strings" are too stretchy, and parts of the valve flop or bulge back into the atrium.
                
The opening of the valve may stretch.
                
These problems can keep the valve from making a tight seal. Some people's valves are abnormal in more than one way.
Mitral valve prolapse (MVP) affects people of all ages and both sexes; however, aging raises the risk of developing the disease.
                
Certain conditions have been associated with MVP, including:
                
A history of rheumatic fever
                
Connective tissue disorders, such as Marfan syndrome or Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
                
Graves disease
                
Scoliosis and other skeletal problems
                
Some types of muscular dystrophy
You can't prevent mitral valve prolapse (MVP). Most people who have the condition are born with it.
                
Complications from MVP, such as arrhythmias (irregular heartbeats) and infective endocarditis (IE), are rare. IE is an infection of the inner lining of your heart chambers and valves.
                
People at high risk for IE may be given antibiotics before some types of surgery and dental work. Antibiotics can help prevent IE. Your doctor will tell you whether you need this type of treatment.
                
People at high risk for IE may include those who've had valve repair or replacement or who have some types of underlying heart disease.