Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) is a group of disorders in which the immune system cannot make antibodies against agents that cause infection (such as bacteria). CVID is characterized by low levels of most or all of the immunoglobulin (Ig) classes. This causes affected people to get frequent infections, particularly in the sinuses, lungs, and digestive tract. Symptoms most commonly begin in early adulthood but have been found in children as young as age two. While in most cases the cause of CVID is unknown, it has been associated with changes (mutations) in at least 10 genes. About 10% of cases are due to mutations in the TNFRSF13B gene. Treatment for CVID includes Ig replacement therapy, which stops the cycle of recurrent infections.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Common variable immunodeficiency. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Decreased antibody level in blood 90% Lymphopenia 90% Otitis media 90% Recurrent respiratory infections 90% Sinusitis 90% Thrombocytopenia 90% Abnormality of the bronchi 50% Elevated hepatic transaminases 50% Hemolytic anemia 50% Lymphadenopathy 50% Malabsorption 50% Splenomegaly 50% Subcutaneous hemorrhage 50% Arthralgia 7.5% Emphysema 7.5% Gastrointestinal stroma tumor 7.5% Lymphoma 7.5% Neoplasm of the stomach 7.5% Restrictive lung disease 7.5% Vasculitis 7.5% Autoimmune neutropenia 5% Autosomal recessive inheritance - B lymphocytopenia - Bronchiectasis - Conjunctivitis - Diarrhea - Hepatomegaly - IgA deficiency - IgG deficiency - IgM deficiency - Immunodeficiency - Impaired T cell function - Recurrent bacterial infections - Recurrent bronchitis - Recurrent otitis media - Recurrent pneumonia - Recurrent sinusitis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) is usually sporadic and thought to result from a combination of genetic and environmental factors. In most cases, the exact cause of CVID is unknown. Genetic factors associated with CVID include mutations in genes involved in the development and function of immune system cells (B cells) which help protect against infection. B cells make proteins called antibodies (also known as immunoglobulins), which attach to foreign agents and "mark" them to be destroyed. Mutations in genes associated with CVID result in B cells that don't make enough antibodies. This causes difficulty fighting infections, causing the signs and symptoms of CVID. Mutations in at least 10 genes have been associated with CVID. About 10% of affected people have mutations in the TNFRSF13B gene. However, not all people who inherit a mutation associated with CVID develop the disease. This is why additional genetic and/or environmental factors are probably needed for the disorder to occur. While CVID usually occurs in people with no family history of the condition, some cases are inherited in an autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive manner.
  The main treatment for common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) is Ig replacement therapy, which stops the cycle of recurrent infections. Ig may be taken intravenously (through the vein) or subcutaneously (by injection). Adverse reactions to Ig must be monitored during therapy. Ig therapy is effective in most people, leading to less frequent infections and arthritic symptoms. However, gastrointestinal (digestive) symptoms have little improvement with IVIG. In some people wwith CVID and severe autoimmune disease, steroids or other immunosuppressive drugs in addition to Ig therapy may be needed. Detailed information about the management of CVID can be viewed on Medscape Reference's Web site.
Common variable immune deficiency (CVID) is a disorder that impairs the immune system. People with CVID are highly susceptible to infection from foreign invaders such as bacteria, or more rarely, viruses and often develop recurrent infections, particularly in the lungs, sinuses, and ears. Pneumonia is common in people with CVID. Over time, recurrent infections can lead to chronic lung disease. Affected individuals may also experience infection or inflammation of the gastrointestinal tract, which can cause diarrhea and weight loss. Abnormal accumulation of immune cells causes enlarged lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy) or an enlarged spleen (splenomegaly) in some people with CVID. Immune cells can accumulate in other organs, forming small lumps called granulomas.  Approximately 25 percent of people with CVID have an autoimmune disorder, which occurs when the immune system malfunctions and attacks the body's tissues and organs. The blood cells are most frequently affected by autoimmune attacks in CVID; the most commonly occurring autoimmune disorders are immune thrombocytopenia purpura, which is an abnormal bleeding disorder caused by a decrease in platelets, and autoimmune hemolytic anemia, which results in premature destruction of red blood cells. Other autoimmune disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis can occur. Individuals with CVID also have a greater than normal risk of developing certain types of cancer, including a cancer of immune system cells called non-Hodgkin lymphoma and less frequently, stomach (gastric) cancer.  People with CVID may start experiencing signs and symptoms of the disorder anytime between childhood and adulthood. The life expectancy of individuals with CVID varies depending on the severity and frequency of illnesses they experience. Most people with CVID live into adulthood.
CVID is estimated to affect 1 in 25,000 to 1 in 50,000 people worldwide, although the prevalence can vary across different populations.
CVID is believed to result from mutations in genes that are involved in the development and function of immune system cells called B cells. B cells are specialized white blood cells that help protect the body against infection. When B cells mature, they produce special proteins called antibodies (also known as immunoglobulins). These proteins attach to foreign particles, marking them for destruction. Mutations in the genes associated with CVID result in dysfunctional B cells that cannot make sufficient amounts of antibodies.  People with CVID have a shortage (deficiency) of specific antibodies called immunoglobulin G (IgG), immunoglobulin A (IgA), and immunoglobulin M (IgM). Some have a deficiency of all three antibodies, while others are lacking only IgG and IgA. A shortage of these antibodies makes it difficult for people with this disorder to fight off infections. Abnormal and deficient immune responses over time likely contribute to the increased cancer risk. In addition, vaccines for diseases such as measles and influenza do not provide protection for people with CVID because they cannot produce an antibody response.  Mutations in at least 10 genes have been associated with CVID. Approximately 10 percent of affected individuals have mutations in the TNFRSF13B gene. The protein produced from this gene plays a role in the survival and maturation of B cells and in the production of antibodies. TNFRSF13B gene mutations disrupt B cell function and antibody production, leading to immune dysfunction. Other genes associated with CVID are also involved in the function and maturation of immune system cells, particularly of B cells; mutations in these genes account for only a small percentage of cases.  In most cases of CVID, the cause is unknown, but it is likely a combination of genetic and environmental factors.
Most cases of CVID are sporadic and occur in people with no apparent history of the disorder in their family. These cases probably result from a complex interaction of environmental and genetic factors.  In some families, CVID is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of a gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.  In very rare cases, this condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of an altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.  When CVID is caused by mutations in the TNFRSF13B gene, it is often sporadic. When TNFRSF13B gene mutations are inherited, they can cause either autosomal dominant CVID or autosomal recessive CVID.  Not all individuals who inherit a gene mutation associated with CVID will develop the disease. In many cases, affected children have an unaffected parent who shares the same mutation. Additional genetic or environmental factors are probably needed for the disorder to occur.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of common variable immune deficiency:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Common variable immunodeficiency 10  - Genetic Testing Registry: Common variable immunodeficiency 11  - Genetic Testing Registry: Common variable immunodeficiency 2  - Genetic Testing Registry: Common variable immunodeficiency 5  - Genetic Testing Registry: Common variable immunodeficiency 6  - Genetic Testing Registry: Common variable immunodeficiency 7  - Genetic Testing Registry: Common variable immunodeficiency 8, with autoimmunity  - Genetic Testing Registry: Common variable immunodeficiency 9  - KidsHealth from Nemours: Blood Test: Immunoglobulins  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Immunodeficiency Disorders  - National Marrow Donor Program  - Primary Immune Deficiency Treatment Consortium  - United States Immunodeficiency Network   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care