Deep vein thrombosis, or DVT, is a blood clot that forms in a vein deep in the body. Most deep vein clots occur in the lower leg or thigh. If the vein swells, the condition is called thrombophlebitis. A deep vein thrombosis can break loose and cause a serious problem in the lung, called a pulmonary embolism.    Sitting still for a long time can make you more likely to get a DVT. Some medicines and disorders that increase your risk for blood clots can also lead to DVTs. Common symptoms are        -  Warmth and tenderness over the vein     -  Pain or swelling in the part of the body affected     -  Skin redness        Treatment includes medicines to ease pain and inflammation, break up clots and keep new clots from forming. Keeping the affected area raised and applying moist heat can also help. If you are taking a long car or plane trip, take a break, walk or stretch your legs and drink plenty of liquids.
Blood clots can form in your body's deep veins if:
                
A vein's inner lining is damaged. Injuries caused by physical, chemical, or biological factors can damage the veins. Such factors include surgery, serious injuries, inflammation, and immune responses.
                
Blood flow is sluggish or slow. Lack of motion can cause sluggish or slow blood flow. This may occur after surgery, if you're ill and in bed for a long time, or if you're traveling for a long time.
                
Your blood is thicker or more likely to clot than normal. Some inherited conditions (such as factor V Leiden) increase the risk of blood clotting. Hormone therapy or birth control pills also can increase the risk of clotting.
The risk factors for deep vein thrombosis (DVT) include:
                
A history of DVT.
                
Conditions or factors that make your blood thicker or more likely to clot than normal. Some inherited blood disorders (such as factor V Leiden) will do this. Hormone therapy or birth control pills also increase the risk of clotting.
                
Injury to a deep vein from surgery, a broken bone, or other trauma.
                
Slow blood flow in a deep vein due to lack of movement. This may occur after surgery, if you're ill and in bed for a long time, or if you're traveling for a long time.
                
Pregnancy and the first 6 weeks after giving birth.
                
Recent or ongoing treatment for cancer.
                
A central venous catheter. This is a tube placed in a vein to allow easy access to the bloodstream for medical treatment.
                
Older age. Being older than 60 is a risk factor for DVT, although DVT can occur at any age.
                
Overweight or obesity.
                
Smoking.
                
Your risk for DVT increases if you have more than one of the risk factors listed above.
The signs and symptoms of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) might be related to DVT itself or pulmonary embolism (PE). See your doctor right away if you have signs or symptoms of either condition. Both DVT and PE can cause serious, possibly life-threatening problems if not treated.
                
Deep Vein Thrombosis
                
Only about half of the people who have DVT have signs and symptoms. These signs and symptoms occur in the leg affected by the deep vein clot. They include:
                
Swelling of the leg or along a vein in the leg
                
Pain or tenderness in the leg, which you may feel only when standing or walking
                
Increased warmth in the area of the leg that's swollen or painful
                
Red or discolored skin on the leg
                
Pulmonary Embolism
                
Some people aren't aware of a deep vein clot until they have signs and symptoms of PE. Signs and symptoms of PE include:
                
Unexplained shortness of breath
                
Pain with deep breathing
                
Coughing up blood
                
Rapid breathing and a fast heart rate also may be signs of PE.
You can take steps to prevent deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE). If you're at risk for these conditions:
                
See your doctor for regular checkups.
                
Take all medicines as your doctor prescribes.
                
Get out of bed and move around as soon as possible after surgery or illness (as your doctor recommends). Moving around lowers your chance of developing a blood clot.
                
Exercise your lower leg muscles during long trips. This helps prevent blood clots from forming.
                
If you've had DVT or PE before, you can help prevent future blood clots. Follow the steps above and:
                
Take all medicines that your doctor prescribes to prevent or treat blood clots
                
Follow up with your doctor for tests and treatment
                
Use compression stockings as your doctor directs to prevent leg swelling
                
Contact your doctor at once if you have any signs or symptoms of DVT or PE. For more information, go to "What Are the Signs and Symptoms of Deep Vein Thrombosis?"
                
Travel Tips
                
The risk of developing DVT while traveling is low. The risk increases if the travel time is longer than 4 hours or you have other DVT risk factors.
                
During long trips, it may help to:
                
Walk up and down the aisles of the bus, train, or airplane. If traveling by car, stop about every hour and walk around.
                
Move your legs and flex and stretch your feet to improve blood flow in your calves.
                
Wear loose and comfortable clothing.
                
Drink plenty of fluids and avoid alcohol.
                
If you have risk factors for DVT, your doctor may advise you to wear compression stockings while traveling. Or, he or she may suggest that you take a blood-thinning medicine before traveling.