Key Points
                    - Polycythemia vera is a disease in which too many red blood cells are made in the bone marrow.    - Symptoms of polycythemia vera include headaches and a feeling of fullness below the ribs on the left side.    - Special blood tests are used to diagnose polycythemia vera.
                
                
                    Polycythemia vera is a disease in which too many red blood cells are made in the bone marrow.
                    In polycythemia vera, the blood becomes thickened with too many red blood cells. The number of white blood cells and platelets may also increase. These extra blood cells may collect in the spleen and cause it to swell. The increased number of red blood cells, white blood cells, or platelets in the blood can cause bleeding problems and make clots form in blood vessels. This can increase the risk of stroke or heart attack. In patients who are older than 65 years or who have a history of blood clots, the risk of stroke or heart attack is higher. Patients also have an increased risk of acute myeloid leukemia or primary myelofibrosis.
Symptoms of polycythemia vera include headaches and a feeling of fullness below the ribs on the left side. Polycythemia vera often does not cause early signs or symptoms. It may be found during a routine blood test. Signs and symptoms may occur as the number of blood cells increases. Other conditions may cause the same signs and symptoms. Check with your doctor if you have any of the following:         - A feeling of pressure or fullness below the ribs on the left side.    - Headaches.    - Double vision or seeing dark or blind spots that come and go.    - Itching all over the body, especially after being in warm or hot water.    - Reddened face that looks like a blush or sunburn.    - Weakness.    - Dizziness.    - Weight loss for no known reason.
Special blood tests are used to diagnose polycythemia vera. In addition to a complete blood count, bone marrow aspiration and biopsy, and cytogenetic analysis, a serum erythropoietin test is used to diagnose polycythemia vera. In this test, a sample of blood is checked for the level of erythropoietin (a hormone that stimulates new red blood cells to be made). In polycythemia vera, the erythropoietin level would be lower than normal because the body does not need to make more red blood cells.
The purpose of treatment for polycythemia vera is to reduce the number of extra blood cells. Treatment of polycythemia vera may include the following:             -  Phlebotomy.     -  Chemotherapy with or without phlebotomy.     -  Biologic therapy using interferon alfa or pegylated interferon alpha.     - Low-dose aspirin.            Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with polycythemia vera. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. General information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website.
Polycythemia vera (PV) is a condition characterized by an increased number of red blood cells in the bloodstream. Affected people may also have excess white blood cells and platelets. These extra cells cause the blood to be thicker than normal, increasing the risk for blood clots that can block blood flow in arteries and veins. People with PV have an increased risk of deep vein thrombosis which can cause a pulmonary embolism, heart attack, and stroke. Most cases of PV are not inherited and are acquired during a person's lifetime. In rare cases, the risk for PV runs in families and may be inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. The condition has been associated with mutations in the JAK2 and TET2 genes.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Polycythemia vera. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abdominal pain 90% Acute leukemia 90% Bruising susceptibility 90% Coronary artery disease 90% Epistaxis 90% Gastrointestinal hemorrhage 90% Gingival bleeding 90% Hepatomegaly 90% Migraine 90% Myelodysplasia 90% Splenomegaly 90% Tinnitus 90% Vertigo 90% Weight loss 90% Arthralgia 50% Respiratory insufficiency 50% Arterial thrombosis 7.5% Cerebral ischemia 7.5% Portal hypertension 7.5% Pruritus 7.5% Thrombophlebitis 7.5% Autosomal dominant inheritance - Budd-Chiari syndrome - Cerebral hemorrhage - Increased hematocrit - Increased hemoglobin - Increased megakaryocyte count - Increased red blood cell mass - Leukocytosis - Somatic mutation - Sporadic - Thrombocytopenia - Thrombocytosis - Thromboembolism - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 Most cases of polycythemia vera (PCV) are not inherited from a parent and are acquired during a person's lifetime. The condition is associated with genetic changes (mutations) that are somatic, which means they occur in cells of the body but not in egg and sperm cells. In rare cases, the risk to develop PCV runs in families and sometimes appears to have an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. This means that only one altered copy of a gene in each cell is enough to give a person an increased risk for PCV. In other words, while an increased risk to develop PCV may be inherited, the condition itself is not inherited.
 There are several treatments for the itching (pruritus) related to polycythemia vera (PV).  No single treatment has been found to be effective for all affected individuals.  For mild cases, treatment may include avoiding triggers of itching and dry skin, or controlling the temperature of the environment and bathing water.  Several other treatments are available for more severe itching or for itching the does not respond to initial treatments.  Interferon-alpha has been found to be effective for reducing itching in a majority of individual with PV who received this therapy; however, this medication can have significant side effects.  Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), typically used to treat depression, may reducing itching for some individuals with PV..  Phototherapy, antihistamines, and phlebotomy have also been attempted, with mixed results.  Additionally, if a genetic cause of polycythemia vera is know, medications targeted to the causative gene - such as JAK or mTor inhibitors - may be helpful in reducing itching.
Primary Polycythemia
                
Polycythemia vera (PV) also is known as primary polycythemia. A mutation, or change, in the body's JAK2 gene is the main cause of PV. The JAK2 gene makes a protein that helps the body produce blood cells.
                
What causes the change in the JAK2 gene isn't known. PV generally isn't inheritedthat is, passed from parents to children through genes. However, in some families, the JAK2 gene may have a tendency to mutate. Other, unknown genetic factors also may play a role in causing PV.
                
Secondary Polycythemia
                
Another type of polycythemia, called secondary polycythemia, isn't related to the JAK2 gene. Long-term exposure to low oxygen levels causes secondary polycythemia.
                
A lack of oxygen over a long period can cause your body to make more of the hormone erythropoietin (EPO). High levels of EPO can prompt your body to make more red blood cells than normal. This leads to thicker blood, as seen in PV.
                
People who have severe heart or lung disease may develop secondary polycythemia. People who smoke, spend long hours at high altitudes, or are exposed to high levels of carbon monoxide where they work or live also are at risk.
                
For example, working in an underground parking garage or living in a home with a poorly vented fireplace or furnace can raise your risk for secondary polycythemia.
                
Rarely, tumors can make and release EPO, or certain blood problems can cause the body to make more EPO.
                
Sometimes doctors can cure secondary polycythemiait depends on whether the underlying cause can be stopped, controlled, or cured.
Polycythemia vera (PV) is a rare blood disease. The disease affects people of all ages, but it's most common in adults who are older than 60. PV is rare in children and young adults. Men are at slightly higher risk for PV than women.
Primary polycythemia (polycythemia vera) can't be prevented. However, with proper treatment, you can prevent or delay symptoms and complications.
                
Sometimes you can prevent secondary polycythemia by avoiding things that deprive your body of oxygen for long periods. For example, you can avoid mountain climbing, living at a high altitude, or smoking.
                
People who have serious heart or lung diseases may develop secondary polycythemia. Treatment for the underlying disease may improve the secondary polycythemia. Following a healthy lifestyle to lower your risk of heart and lung diseases also will help you prevent secondary polycythemia.
Polycythemia vera is a condition characterized by an increased number of red blood cells in the bloodstream. Affected individuals may also have excess white blood cells and blood clotting cells called platelets. These extra cells cause the blood to be thicker than normal. As a result, abnormal blood clots are more likely to form and block the flow of blood through arteries and veins. Individuals with polycythemia vera have an increased risk of deep vein thrombosis (DVT), a type of blood clot that occurs in the deep veins of the arms or legs. If a DVT travels through the bloodstream and lodges in the lungs, it can cause a life-threatening clot known as a pulmonary embolism (PE). Affected individuals also have an increased risk of heart attack and stroke caused by blood clots in the heart and brain.  Polycythemia vera typically develops in adulthood, around age 60, although in rare cases it occurs in children and young adults. This condition may not cause any symptoms in its early stages. Some people with polycythemia vera experience headaches, dizziness, ringing in the ears (tinnitus), impaired vision, or itchy skin. Affected individuals frequently have reddened skin because of the extra red blood cells. Other complications of polycythemia vera include an enlarged spleen (splenomegaly), stomach ulcers, gout (a form of arthritis caused by a buildup of uric acid in the joints), heart disease, and cancer of blood-forming cells (leukemia).
The prevalence of polycythemia vera varies worldwide. The condition affects an estimated 44 to 57 per 100,000 individuals in the United States. For unknown reasons, men develop polycythemia vera more frequently than women.
Mutations in the JAK2 and TET2 genes are associated with polycythemia vera. Although it remains unclear exactly what initiates polycythemia vera, researchers believe that it begins when mutations occur in the DNA of a hematopoietic stem cell. These stem cells are located in the bone marrow and have the potential to develop into red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. JAK2 gene mutations seem to be particularly important for the development of polycythemia vera, as nearly all affected individuals have a mutation in this gene. The JAK2 gene provides instructions for making a protein that promotes the growth and division (proliferation) of cells. The JAK2 protein is especially important for controlling the production of blood cells from hematopoietic stem cells.  JAK2 gene mutations result in the production of a JAK2 protein that is constantly turned on (constitutively activated), which increases production of blood cells and prolongs their survival. With so many extra cells in the bloodstream, abnormal blood clots are more likely to form. Thicker blood also flows more slowly throughout the body, which prevents organs from receiving enough oxygen. Many of the signs and symptoms of polycythemia vera are related to a shortage of oxygen in body tissues.  The function of the TET2 gene is unknown. Although mutations in the TET2 gene have been found in approximately 16 percent of people with polycythemia vera, it is unclear what role these mutations play in the development of the condition.
Most cases of polycythemia vera are not inherited. This condition is associated with genetic changes that are somatic, which means they are acquired during a person's lifetime and are present only in certain cells.  In rare instances, polycythemia vera has been found to run in families. In some of these families, the risk of developing polycythemia vera appears to have an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. Autosomal dominant inheritance means that one copy of an altered gene in each cell is sufficient to increase the risk of developing polycythemia vera, although the cause of this condition in familial cases is unknown. In these families, people seem to inherit an increased risk of polycythemia vera, not the disease itself.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of polycythemia vera:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Polycythemia vera  - MPN Research Foundation: Diagnosis  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Polycythemia Vera   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care