Human T-cell leukemia virus, type 2 (HTLV-2) is a retroviral infection that affect the T cells (a type of white blood cell). Although this virus generally causes no signs or symptoms, scientists suspect that some affected people may later develop neurological problems and/or chronic lung infections. HTLV-2 is spread by blood transfusions, sexual contact and sharing needles. It can also be spread from mother to child during birth or breast-feeding. There is no cure or treatment for HTLV-2 and it is considered a lifelong condition; however, most infected people remain asymptomatic (show no symptoms) throughout life.
 Human T-cell leukemia virus, type 2 (HTLV-2) generally causes no signs or symptoms. Although HTLV-2 has not been definitively linked with any specific health problems, scientists suspect that some affected people may later develop neurological problems such as:[7046] Sensory neuropathies (conditions that affect the nerves that provide feeling) Gait abnormalities Bladder dysfunction Mild cognitive impairment Motor abnormalities (loss of or limited muscle control or movement, or limited mobility) Erectile dysfunction Although evidence is limited, there may also be a link between HTLV-2 and chronic lung infections (i.e. pneumonia and bronchitis), arthritis, asthma, and dermatitis.
 Human T-cell leukemia virus, type 2 (HTLV-2) occurs when a person is infected by the human T-cell leukemia retrovirus. HTLV-2 is spread by blood transfusions, sexual contact and sharing needles. It can also be spread from mother to child during birth or breast-feeding. It is unclear why some people with HTLV-2 may develop neurological problems and other medical conditions, while others remain asymptomatic (show no signs or symptoms) their entire lives.
 Human T-cell leukemia virus, type 2 (HTLV-2) is usually diagnosed based on blood tests that detect antibodies to the virus. However, HTLV-2 is often never suspected or diagnosed since most people never develop any signs or symptoms of the infection. Diagnosis may occur during screening for blood donation, testing performed due to a family history of the infection, or a work-up for an HTLV-2-associated medical problems.
 No cure or treatment exists for human T-cell leukemia virus, type 2 (HTLV-2). Management is focused on early detection and preventing the spread of HTLV-2 to others. Screening blood doners, promoting safe sex and discouraging needle sharing can decrease the number of new infections. Mother-to-child transmission can be reduced by screening pregnant women so infected mothers can avoid breastfeeding.
Human T-cell leukemia virus, type 1 (HTLV-1) is a retroviral infection that affect the T cells (a type of white blood cell). Although this virus generally causes no signs or symptoms, some affected people may later develop adult T-cell leukemia (ATL), HTLV-1 associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP) or other medical conditions. HTLV-1 is spread by blood transfusions, sexual contact and sharing needles. It can also be spread from mother to child during birth or breast-feeding. There is no cure or treatment for HTLV-1 and it is considered a lifelong condition; however, most (95%) infected people remain asymptomatic (show no symptoms) throughout life.
 Human T-cell leukemia virus, type 1 (HTLV-1) generally causes no signs or symptoms. However, some affected people may later develop adult T-cell leukemia (ATL), HTLV-1 associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP) or other medical conditions. Approximately 2-5% of people with HTLV-1 will develop ATL, a cancer of the T-cells (a type of white blood cell). The signs and symptoms of this condition and the disease progression vary from person to person. Affected people may have the following features: Fatigue Lymphadenopathy (swollen lymph nodes) Thirst Nausea and vomiting Fever Skin and bone abnormalities Enlarged liver and/or spleen Frequent infections Roughly .25-2% of people with HTLV-1 will develop HAM/TSP, a chronic, progressive disease of the nervous system. Signs and symptoms of this condition vary but may include: Progressive weakness Stiff muscles Muscle spasms Backache 'Weak' bladder Constipation
 Human T-cell leukemia virus, type 1 (HTLV-1) occurs when a person is infected by the human T-cell leukemia retrovirus. HTLV-1 is spread by blood transfusions, sexual contact and sharing needles. It can also be spread from mother to child during birth or breast-feeding. It is unclear why some people with HTLV-1 develop adult T-cell leukemia (ATL), HTLV-1 associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP) or other medical conditions, while others remain asymptomatic (show no signs or symptoms) their entire lives.
 Human T-cell leukemia virus, type 1 (HTLV-1) is usually diagnosed based on blood tests that detect antibodies to the virus. However, HTLV-1 is often never suspected or diagnosed since most people (95%) never develop any signs or symptoms of the infection. Diagnosis may occur during screening for blood donation, testing performed due to a family history of the infection, or a work-up for an HTLV-1-associated condition such as adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) or HTLV-1 associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP).
  No cure or treatment exists for human T-cell leukemia virus, type 1 (HTLV-1). Management is focused on early detection and preventing the spread of HTLV-1 to others. Screening blood doners, promoting safe sex and discouraging needle sharing can decrease the number of new infections. Mother-to-child transmission can be reduced by screening pregnant women so infected mothers can avoid breastfeeding.