Everyday Tasks Are Challenging  Low vision means that even with regular glasses, contact lenses, medicine, or surgery, people find everyday tasks difficult to do. Reading the mail, shopping, cooking, seeing the TV, and writing can seem challenging. Millions of Americans lose some of their vision every year. Irreversible vision loss is most common among people over age 65. (Watch the video to learn more about low vision. To enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. To reduce the video, press the Escape (Esc) button on your keyboard.) Not a Normal Part of Aging Losing vision is not just part of getting older. Some normal changes occur as we get older. However, these changes usually don't lead to low vision.
Eye Diseases and Health Conditions Most people develop low vision because of eye diseases and health conditions like macular degeneration, cataracts, glaucoma, and diabetes. Your eye care professional can tell the difference between normal changes in the aging eye and those caused by eye diseases. Injuries and Birth Defects A few people develop vision loss after eye injuries or from birth defects. Although vision that is lost usually cannot be restored, many people can make the most of the vision they have. How a Scene Looks to People With Normal and Low Vision Scene as viewed by a person with normal vision. Scene as viewed by a person with diabetic retinopathy. Scene as viewed by a person with age-related macular degeneration. Scene as viewed by a person with glaucoma. Scene as viewed by a person with cataracts.
There are many signs that can signal vision loss. For example, even with your regular glasses, do you have difficulty - recognizing faces of friends and relatives?   - doing things that require you to see well up close, such as reading, cooking, sewing, fixing things around the house, or picking out and matching the color of your clothes?  - doing things at work or home because lights seem dimmer than they used to?  - reading street and bus signs or the names of stores? recognizing faces of friends and relatives? doing things that require you to see well up close, such as reading, cooking, sewing, fixing things around the house, or picking out and matching the color of your clothes? doing things at work or home because lights seem dimmer than they used to? reading street and bus signs or the names of stores? Early Diagnosis Is Important Vision changes like these could be early warning signs of eye disease. People over age 60 should have an eye exam through dilated pupils at least once a year. Usually, the earlier your problem is diagnosed, the better your chances of undergoing successful treatment and keeping your remaining vision. Regular dilated eye exams should be part of your routine health care. However, if you think your vision has recently changed, you should see your eye care professional as soon as possible.
People age 60 and older, as well as African Americans and Hispanics over age 45, are at higher risk. African Americans and Hispanics are at higher risk for low vision because they are at higher risk for developing diabetes and diabetic retinopathy, and African Americans are at a higher risk for developing glaucoma.