Summary : Vitamins are substances that your body needs to grow and develop normally. Vitamin D helps your body absorb calcium. Calcium is one of the main building blocks of bone. A lack of vitamin D can lead to bone diseases such as osteoporosis or rickets. Vitamin D also has a role in your nerve, muscle, and immune systems.    You can get vitamin D in three ways: through your skin, from your diet, and from supplements. Your body forms vitamin D naturally after exposure to sunlight. However, too much sun exposure can lead to skin aging and skin cancer. So many people try to get their vitamin D from other sources.    Vitamin D-rich foods include egg yolks, saltwater fish, and liver. Some other foods, like milk and cereal, often have added vitamin D.     You can also take vitamin D supplements. Check with your health care provider to see how much you should take. People who might need extra vitamin D include       - Seniors    - Breastfed infants    - People with dark skin    - People with certain conditions, such as liver diseases, cystic fibrosis and Crohn's disease    - People who are obese or have had gastric bypass surgery       NIH: National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements
Summary : Vitamins are substances that your body needs to grow and develop normally. Vitamin C is an antioxidant. It is important for your skin, bones, and connective tissue. It promotes healing and helps the body absorb iron.    Vitamin C comes from fruits and vegetables. Good sources include citrus, red and green peppers, tomatoes, broccoli, and greens. Some juices and cereals have added vitamin C.    Some people may need extra vitamin C:       - Pregnant/breastfeeding women    - Smokers    - People recovering from surgery    - Burn victims
Summary : Vitamins are substances that your body needs to grow and develop normally. Vitamin K helps your body by making proteins for healthy bones and tissues. It also makes proteins for blood clotting. If you don't have enough vitamin K, you may bleed too much.    Newborns have very little vitamin K. They usually get a shot of vitamin K soon after they are born.    If you take blood thinners, you need to be careful about how much vitamin K you get. You also need to be careful about taking vitamin E supplements. Vitamin E can interfere with how vitamin K works in your body. Ask your health care provider for recommendations about these vitamins.    There are different types of vitamin K. Most people get vitamin K from plants such as green vegetables, and dark berries. Bacteria in your intestines also produce small amounts of another type of vitamin K.
Summary : Vitamins are substances that your body needs to grow and develop normally. Vitamin E is an antioxidant. It plays a role in your immune system and metabolic processes.    Good sources of vitamin E include       - Vegetable oils    - Margarine    - Nuts and seeds    - Leafy greens       Vitamin E is also added to foods like cereals. Most people get enough vitamin E from the foods they eat. People with certain disorders, such as liver diseases, cystic fibrosis, and Crohn's disease may need extra vitamin E.     Vitamin E supplements may be harmful for people who take blood thinners and other medicines. Check with your health care provider before taking the supplements.    NIH: National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements
Summary : Vitamins are substances that your body needs to grow and develop normally. Vitamin A plays a role in your       - Vision    - Bone growth    - Reproduction    - Cell functions    - Immune system       Vitamin A is an antioxidant. It can come from plant or animal sources. Plant sources include colorful fruits and vegetables. Animal sources include liver and whole milk. Vitamin A is also added to foods like cereals.    Vegetarians, young children, and alcoholics may need extra Vitamin A. You might also need more if you have certain conditions, such as liver diseases, cystic fibrosis, and Crohn's disease. Check with your health care provider to see if you need to take vitamin A supplements.    NIH: National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements
Ataxia with vitamin E deficiency is a disorder that impairs the body's ability to use vitamin E obtained from the diet. Vitamin E is an antioxidant, which means that it protects cells in the body from the damaging effects of unstable molecules called free radicals. A shortage (deficiency) of vitamin E can lead to neurological problems, such as difficulty coordinating movements (ataxia) and speech (dysarthria), loss of reflexes in the legs (lower limb areflexia), and a loss of sensation in the extremities (peripheral neuropathy). Some people with this condition have developed an eye disorder called retinitis pigmentosa that causes vision loss. Most people who have ataxia with vitamin E deficiency start to experience problems with movement between the ages of 5 and 15 years. The movement problems tend to worsen with age.
Ataxia with vitamin E deficiency is a rare condition; however, its prevalence is unknown.
Mutations in the TTPA gene cause ataxia with vitamin E deficiency. The TTPA gene provides instructions for making the -tocopherol transfer protein (TTP), which is found in the liver and brain. This protein controls distribution of vitamin E obtained from the diet (also called -tocopherol) to cells and tissues throughout the body. Vitamin E helps cells prevent damage that might be done by free radicals.  TTPA gene mutations impair the activity of the TTP protein, resulting in an inability to retain and use dietary vitamin E. As a result, vitamin E levels in the blood are greatly reduced and free radicals accumulate within cells. Nerve cells (neurons) in the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system) are particularly vulnerable to the damaging effects of free radicals and these cells die off when they are deprived of vitamin E. Nerve cell damage can lead to problems with movement and other features of ataxia with vitamin E deficiency.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of ataxia with vitamin E deficiency:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Ataxia with Vitamin E Deficiency  - Genetic Testing Registry: Ataxia with vitamin E deficiency  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Retinitis pigmentosa  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Vitamin E   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care