Von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) is a rare, genetic disease that causes tumors and cysts to grow in your body. The tumors can be either cancerous or benign. They can grow in your brain and spinal cord, kidneys, pancreas and, in men, their genital tract. Symptoms of VHL vary and depend on the size and location of the tumors. They may include headaches, problems with balance and walking, dizziness, weakness of the limbs, vision problems and high blood pressure.    Detecting and treating VHL early is important. Treatment usually involves surgery or sometimes radiation therapy. The goal is to treat growths while they are small and before they do permanent damage.     NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease is an inherited disorder characterized by the abnormal growth of both benign and cancerous tumors and cysts in many parts of the body. Tumors usually first appear in young adulthood. The types of tumors associated with VHL disease include hemangioblastomas (slow-growing tumors of the central nervous system); kidney cysts and clear cell renal cell carcinoma; pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors; pheochromocytomas (noncancerous tumors of the adrenal glands); and endolymphatic sac tumors. VHL disease is caused by a mutation in the VHL gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Early detection and treatment of VHL disease is important, and usually involves surgical removal of tumors.
 Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease is caused by a mutation in the VHL gene. This gene is a tumor suppressor gene, which helps to control cell growth. Mutations in the VHL gene lead to a lack of regulation of cell growth and survival, allowing cells to grow and divide uncontrollably, forming the tumors that are associated with VHL disease.
 Mutations in the gene that causes VHL disease (the VHL gene) are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This means that having a mutation in only one copy of the VHL gene in each cell is enough to increase a person's risk of developing VHL disease. In most autosomal dominant conditions, having one mutated copy of the responsible gene is sufficient to cause the condition. However, in VHL disease, a mutation in the other copy of the gene must occur (during a person's lifetime) to trigger the development of VHL disease. For example, a person may inherit a mutated copy of the gene from a parent, but acquiring a second mutation in the other gene copy in a specific organ may trigger tumor development in that organ. Almost everyone who is born with one VHL mutation will eventually acquire a mutation in the second copy of the gene and develop VHL disease. In most cases, an affected person inherits the first mutated gene from an affected parent. However, in about 20% of cases, the mutation occurs for the first time in a person with no family history of the condition. This is called a de novo mutation. When a person with a mutation that can lead to VHL disease has children, each of their children has a 50% (1 in 2) chance to inherit that mutation.
 The diagnosis of von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease can be made based on specific clinical criteria (signs and symptoms), or when molecular genetic testing reveals a mutation in the VHL gene. Tests that may be used to establish a clinical diagnosis include: MRI of the brain and spinal cord fundoscopy ultrasound examination or MRI of the abdomen blood and urinary catecholamine metabolites.
 Treatment for Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease depends on the location and size of tumors. In general, the goal is to treat growths when they cause symptoms, but are still small so they don't cause permanent damage. Treatment usually involves surgical removal of tumors. Radiation therapy may be used in some cases. All people with VHL disease should be carefully followed by a physician or medical team familiar with the disorder.
von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) is a rare, genetic multi-system disorder in which non-cancerous tumors grow in certain parts of the body. Slow-growing hemgioblastomas -- benign tumors with many blood vessels -- may develop in the brain, spinal cord, the retinas of the eyes, and near the inner ear. Cysts (fluid-filled sacs) may develop around the hemangioblastomas. Other types of tumors develop in the adrenal glands, the kidneys, or the pancreas. Symptoms of VHL vary among individuals and depend on the size and location of the tumors. Symptoms may include headaches, problems with balance and walking, dizziness, weakness of the limbs, vision problems, deafness in one ear, and high blood pressure. Individuals with VHL are also at a higher risk than normal for certain types of cancer, especially kidney cancer.
Treatment for VHL varies according to the location and size of the tumor. In general, the objective of treatment is to treat the tumors before they grow to a size large enough to cause permanent problems by putting pressure on the brain or spinal cord. this pressure can block the flow of cerebrospinal fluid in the nervous system, impair vision, or create deafness. Treatment of most cases of VHL usually involves surgery to remove the tumors before they become harmful. Certain tumors can be treated with focused high-dose irradiation. Individuals with VHL need careful monitoring by a physician and/or medical team familiar with the disorder.
The prognosis for individuals with VHL depends on then number, location, and complications of the tumors. Untreated, VHL may result in blindness and/or permanent brain damage. With early detection and treatment the prognosis is significantly improved. Death is usually caused by complications of brain tumors or kidney cancer.
The mission of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) is to seek fundamental knowledge about the brain and nervous system, and to use that knowledge to reduce the burden of neurological disease. The NINDS pursues a vigorous program of research aimed at preventing and treating disorders that cause tumors in the brain and spinal cord such as VHL. A natural history study hopes to learn more about the growth of brain and spinal cord tumors, as well as cysts that develop in association with them in individuals with VHL. Researchers will examine how fast the tumors grow and try to determine which factors (such as puberty, pregnancy, menopause, or blood proteins) affect tumor growth. Based on laboratory findings, NINDS researchers are planning drug trials for individuals with VHL. For example, NNDS scientists hope to learn if a drug that fights other cancers might slow the growth of hemangioblastomas in some people with VHL. The NIH's National Cancer Institute conducts research aimed at treating kidney tumors in individuals with VHL, as well as studies to identify gene mutations in people who are at risk of developing the disease..
Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome is an inherited disorder characterized by the formation of tumors and fluid-filled sacs (cysts) in many different parts of the body. Tumors may be either noncancerous or cancerous and most frequently appear during young adulthood; however, the signs and symptoms of von Hippel-Lindau syndrome can occur throughout life.  Tumors called hemangioblastomas are characteristic of von Hippel-Lindau syndrome. These growths are made of newly formed blood vessels. Although they are typically noncancerous, they can cause serious or life-threatening complications. Hemangioblastomas that develop in the brain and spinal cord can cause headaches, vomiting, weakness, and a loss of muscle coordination (ataxia). Hemangioblastomas can also occur in the light-sensitive tissue that lines the back of the eye (the retina). These tumors, which are also called retinal angiomas, may cause vision loss.  People with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome commonly develop cysts in the kidneys, pancreas, and genital tract. They are also at an increased risk of developing a type of kidney cancer called clear cell renal cell carcinoma and a type of pancreatic cancer called a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor.  Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome is associated with a type of tumor called a pheochromocytoma, which most commonly occurs in the adrenal glands (small hormone-producing glands located on top of each kidney). Pheochromocytomas are usually noncancerous. They may cause no symptoms, but in some cases they are associated with headaches, panic attacks, excess sweating, or dangerously high blood pressure that may not respond to medication. Pheochromocytomas are particularly dangerous if they develop during pregnancy.  About 10 percent of people with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome develop endolymphatic sac tumors, which are noncancerous tumors in the inner ear. These growths can cause hearing loss in one or both ears, as well as ringing in the ears (tinnitus) and problems with balance. Without treatment, these tumors can cause sudden profound deafness.
The incidence of von Hippel-Lindau syndrome is estimated to be 1 in 36,000 individuals.
Mutations in the VHL gene cause von Hippel-Lindau syndrome. The VHL gene is a tumor suppressor gene, which means it keeps cells from growing and dividing too rapidly or in an uncontrolled way. Mutations in this gene prevent production of the VHL protein or lead to the production of an abnormal version of the protein. An altered or missing VHL protein cannot effectively regulate cell survival and division. As a result, cells grow and divide uncontrollably to form the tumors and cysts that are characteristic of von Hippel-Lindau syndrome.
Mutations in the VHL gene are inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means that one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to increase the risk of developing tumors and cysts. Most people with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome inherit an altered copy of the gene from an affected parent. In about 20 percent of cases, however, the altered gene is the result of a new mutation that occurred during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) or very early in development.  Unlike most autosomal dominant conditions, in which one altered copy of a gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder, two copies of the VHL gene must be altered to trigger tumor and cyst formation in von Hippel-Lindau syndrome. A mutation in the second copy of the VHL gene occurs during a person's lifetime in certain cells within organs such as the brain, retina, and kidneys. Cells with two altered copies of this gene make no functional VHL protein, which allows tumors and cysts to develop. Almost everyone who inherits one VHL mutation will eventually acquire a mutation in the second copy of the gene in some cells, leading to the features of von Hippel-Lindau syndrome.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of von Hippel-Lindau syndrome:  - Brigham and Women's Hospital  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Von Hippel-Lindau Syndrome  - Genetic Testing Registry: Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome  - Genomics Education Programme (UK)  - MD Anderson Cancer Center  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Pheochromocytoma  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Renal Cell Carcinoma  - National Cancer Institute: Genetic Testing for Hereditary Cancer Syndromes   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care