Weaver syndrome is a rare condition that is characterized primarily by tall stature. Other signs and symptoms of the condition may include macrocephaly (unusually large head size); intellectual disability; distinctive facial features; camptodactyly (permanently bent digits) of the fingers and/or toes; poor coordination; soft and doughy skin; umbilical hernia; abnormal muscle tone; and a hoarse, low-pitched cry during infancy. Some studies also suggest that people affected by Weaver syndrome may have an increased risk of developing neuroblastoma. Weaver syndrome is usually caused by changes (mutations) in the EZH2 gene. Although the condition is considered autosomal dominant, most cases occur as de novo mutations in people with no family history of the condition. Treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.
The prevalence of Weaver syndrome is unknown. About 50 affected individuals have been described in the medical literature.
Weaver syndrome is usually caused by mutations in the EZH2 gene. The EZH2 gene provides instructions for making a type of enzyme called a histone methyltransferase. Histone methyltransferases modify proteins called histones, which are structural proteins that attach (bind) to DNA and give chromosomes their shape. By adding a molecule called a methyl group to histones (methylation), histone methyltransferases can turn off the activity of certain genes, which is an essential process in normal development. It is unclear how mutations in the EZH2 gene result in the abnormalities characteristic of Weaver syndrome.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Most cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. In a small number of cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Weaver syndrome:  - Genetic Testing Registry: Weaver syndrome   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care