Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome is a brain disorder due to thiamine deficiency that has been associated with both Wernicke's encephalopathy and Korsakoff syndrome. Wernicke's encephalopathy can result from alcohol abuse, dietary deficiencies, prolonged vomiting, eating disorders, or the effects of chemotherapy. Korsakoff's amnesic syndrome is a memory disorder that is associated with alcoholism and involvement of the heart, vascular, and nervous system. Although these conditions may appear to be two different disorders, they are generally considered to be different stages of Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome. Wernicke's encephalopathy represents the "acute" phase and Korsakoff's amnesic syndrome represents the "chronic" phase.
 The symptoms of Wernicke encephalopathy include mental confusion, vision problems (including double vision, abnormal eye movements, and eyelid drooping), inability to think clearly, coma, hypothermia, hypotension, and loss of muscle coordination (ataxia). The symptoms of Korsakoff's amnesia include loss of memory, inability to form new memories, making of stories (confabulation), seeing or hearing things that are not really there (hallucinations), disorientation, and vision impairment. The main features of Korsakoff's amnesic syndrome are impairments in acquiring new information or establishing new memories, and in retrieving previous memories. The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Ataxia - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Coma - Confusion - Horizontal nystagmus - Memory impairment - Ophthalmoplegia - Polyneuropathy - Psychosis - Ptosis - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Wernicke's encephalopathy is a degenerative brain disorder caused by the lack of thiamine (vitamin B1). It may result from alcohol abuse, dietary deficiencies, prolonged vomiting, eating disorders, or the effects of chemotherapy. B1 deficiency causes damage to the brain's thalamus and hypothalamus. Symptoms include mental confusion, vision problems, coma, hypothermia, low blood pressure, and lack of muscle coordination (ataxia). Korsakoff syndrome (also called Korsakoff's amnesic syndrome) is a memory disorder that results from vitamin B1 deficiency and is associated with alcoholism. Korsakoff's syndrome damages nerve cells and supporting cells in the brain and spinal cord, as well as the part of the brain involved with memory. Symptoms include amnesia, tremor, coma, disorientation, and vision problems, The disorder's main features are problems in acquiring new information or establishing new memories, and in retrieving previous memories. Although Wernicke's and Korsakoff's are related disorders, some scientists believe them to be different stages of the same disorder, which is called Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome. Wernicke's encephalopathy represents the "acute" phase of the disorder and Korsakoff's amnesic syndrome represents the disorder progressing to a "chronic" or long-lasting stage.
Treatment involves replacement of thiamine and providing proper nutrition and hydration. In some cases, drug therapy is also recommended.Stopping alcohol use may prevent further nerve and brain damage. In individuals with Wernicke's encephalopathy, it is very important to start thiamine replacement before beginning nutritional replenishment.
Most symptoms of Wernicke's encephalopathy can be reversed if detected and treated promptly and completely. Stopping alcohol use may prevent further nerve and brain damage. However, improvement in memory function is slow and, usually, incomplete. Without treatment, these disorders can be disabling and life-threatening.
The mission of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) is to seek fundamental knowledge about the brain and nervous system and to use that knowledge to reduce the burden of neurological disease. The NINDS supports research on neurological disorders such as Wernicke's encephalopathy, Korsakoff's amnesic syndrome, and Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome, to expand our understanding of the functional changes of the diseases and ways to treat them..One areas of research is studying how exercise can improve cognitive functioning based on modulation of certain nerve cells in a rodent model of amnesia produced by by thiamine deficiency. The National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism also supports research on these disorders.