Wilson disease is a rare inherited disorder that prevents your body from getting rid of extra copper. You need a small amount of copper from food to stay healthy. Too much copper is poisonous.    Normally, your liver releases extra copper into bile, a digestive fluid. With Wilson disease, the copper builds up in your liver, and it releases the copper directly into your bloodstream. This can cause damage to your brain, kidneys, and eyes.    Wilson disease is present at birth, but symptoms usually start between ages 5 and 35. It first attacks the liver, the central nervous system or both. The most characteristic sign is a rusty brown ring around the cornea of the eye. A physical exam and laboratory tests can diagnose it.    Treatment is with drugs to remove the extra copper from your body. You need to take medicine and follow a low-copper diet for the rest of your life. Don't eat shellfish or liver, as these foods may contain high levels of copper. At the beginning of treatment, you'll also need to avoid chocolate, mushrooms, and nuts. Have your drinking water checked for copper content and don't take multivitamins that contain copper.    With early detection and proper treatment, you can enjoy good health.    NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
Wilson disease is a rare inherited disorder that is characterized by the accumulation of copper in the body. Because high levels of copper are toxic to tissues and organs, this buildup can lead to damage of the liver, brain and eyes. Signs and symptoms of Wilson disease include chronic liver disease, central nervous system abnormalities, and psychiatric (mental health-related) disturbances. It is caused by a mutation of the ATP7B gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Although there is no cure for Wilson disease, therapies exist that aim to reduce or control the amount of copper that accumulates in the body.
 Wilson disease is caused by changes (mutations) in the ATP7B gene. This gene encodes a protein that plays an important role in the transport of copper from the liver to the rest of the body. It also helps remove excess copper from the body. Mutations in the ATP7B gene prevent this protein from working properly, which can lead to an accumulation of copper in the body. Because high levels of copper are toxic, this buildup can damage tissues and organs and cause the many signs and symptoms of Wilson disease.
 Wilson disease is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means that to be affected, a person must have a mutation in both copies of the responsible gene in each cell. The parents of an affected person usually each carry one mutated copy of the gene and are referred to as carriers. Carriers typically do not show signs or symptoms of the condition. When two carriers of an autosomal recessive condition have children, each child has a 25% (1 in 4) risk to have the condition, a 50% (1 in 2) risk to be a carrier like each of the parents, and a 25% chance to not have the condition and not be a carrier.
 There is currently no cure for Wilson disease; however, therapies exist that aim to reduce or control the amount of copper that accumulates in the body. Affected people require lifelong treatment, which may include certain medications and/or dietary modifications. If treatment is not effective or if liver failure develops, a liver transplant may be necessary. For more specific information on the treatment and management of Wilson disease, please visit the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disease's (NIDDK) website and/or GeneReviews. Click the link to view these resources.
WD requires lifelong treatment, generally using drugs that remove excess copper from the body and prevent it from re-accumulating. Zinc, which blocks the absorption of copper in the stomach and causes no serious side effects, is often considered the treatment of choice. Penicillamine and trientine are copper chelators that increase urinary excretion of copper; however, both drugs have some side effects. Tetrathiomolybdate is an investigational copper chelating drug with a lower toxicity profile, but it has not been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of WD and its long-term safety and effectiveness arent known. A low-copper diet is also recommended, which involves avoiding mushrooms, nuts, chocolate, dried fruit, liver, and shellfish. In rare cases where there is severe liver disease, a liver transplant may be needed. Symptomatic treatment for symptoms of muscle spasm, stiffness, and tremor may include anticholinergics, tizanidine, baclofen, levodopa, or clonazepam.
Early onset of the disease may foretell a worse prognosis than later onset. If the disorder is detected early and treated appropriately, an individual with WD can usually enjoy normal health and a normal lifespan. If not treated, however, WD can cause brain damage, liver failure, and death. The disease requires lifelong treatment.
Wilson disease is a rare disorder that affects approximately 1 in 30,000 individuals.
Wilson disease is caused by mutations in the ATP7B gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called copper-transporting ATPase 2, which plays a role in the transport of copper from the liver to other parts of the body. Copper is necessary for many cellular functions, but it is toxic when present in excessive amounts. The copper-transporting ATPase 2 protein is particularly important for the elimination of excess copper from the body. Mutations in the ATP7B gene prevent the transport protein from functioning properly. With a shortage of functional protein, excess copper is not removed from the body. As a result, copper accumulates to toxic levels that can damage tissues and organs, particularly the liver and brain.  Research indicates that a normal variation in the PRNP gene may modify the course of Wilson disease. The PRNP gene provides instructions for making prion protein, which is active in the brain and other tissues and appears to be involved in transporting copper. Studies have focused on the effects of a PRNP gene variation that affects position 129 of the prion protein. At this position, people can have either the protein building block (amino acid) methionine or the amino acid valine. Among people who have mutations in the ATP7B gene, it appears that having methionine instead of valine at position 129 of the prion protein is associated with delayed onset of symptoms and an increased occurrence of neurological symptoms, particularly tremors. Larger studies are needed, however, before the effects of this PRNP gene variation on Wilson disease can be established.
Wilson disease is caused by an inherited autosomal recessive mutation, or change, in the ATP7B gene. In an autosomal recessive disease, the child has to inherit the gene mutation from both parents to have an increased likelihood for the disease. The chance of a child inheriting autosomal recessive mutations from both parents with a gene mutation is 25 percent, or one in four. If only one parent carries the mutated gene, the child will not get the disease, although the child may inherit one copy of the gene mutation. The child is called a carrier of the disease and can pass the gene mutation to the next generation. Genetic testing is a procedure that identifies changes in a patients genes and can show whether a parent or child is a carrier of a mutated gene. Autosomal recessive diseases are typically not seen in every generation of an affected family.
                
The following chart shows the chance of inheriting an autosomal recessive mutation from parents who both carry the mutated gene.
                

                
Genetic Diseases   Each cell contains thousands of genes that provide the instructions for making proteins for growth and repair of the body. If a gene has a mutation, the protein made by that gene may not function properly. Not all gene mutations cause a disease.   People have two copies of most genes; they inherit one copy from each parent. A genetic disease occurs when one or both parents pass a mutated gene to a child at conception. A genetic disease can also occur through a spontaneous gene mutation, meaning neither parent carries a copy of the mutated gene. Once a spontaneous gene mutation has occurred in a person, that person can pass the gene mutation on to a child.   Read more about genes and genetic conditions in the U.S. National Library of Medicines Genetics Home Reference at www.ghr.nlm.nih.gov.
People who have Wilson disease that is not treated or diagnosed early can have serious complications, such as
                
- cirrhosisscarring of the liver  - kidney damageas liver function decreases, the kidneys may be damaged  - persistent nervous system problems when nervous system symptoms do not resolve  - liver cancerhepatocellular carcinoma is a type of liver cancer that can occur in people with cirrhosis  - liver failurea condition in which the liver stops working properly  - death, if left untreated
People with Wilson disease should reduce their dietary copper intake by avoiding foods that are high in copper, such as
                
- shellfish  - liver  - mushrooms  - nuts  - chocolate
                
People should not eat these foods during the initial treatment and talk with the health care provider to discuss if they are safe to eat in moderation during maintenance treatment.
                
People with Wilson disease whose tap water runs through copper pipes or comes from a well should check the copper levels in the tap water. Water that sits in copper pipes may pick up copper residue, but running water lowers the level to within acceptable limits. People with Wilson disease should not use copper containers or cookware to store or prepare food or drinks.
                
To help ensure coordinated and safe care, people should discuss their use of complementary and alternative medical practices, including their use of vitamins and dietary supplements, with their health care provider. Read more at www.nccam. nih.gov/health. If the health care provider recommends taking any type of supplement or vitamin, a pharmacist can recommend types that do not contain copper.
                
People should talk with a health care provider about diet changes to reduce copper intake.
                
Liver Transplant
                
A liver transplant may be necessary in people when
                
- cirrhosis leads to liver failure  - acute liver failure happens suddenly  - treatment is not effective
                
A liver transplant is an operation to remove a diseased or an injured liver and replace it with a healthy one from another person, called a donor. A successful transplant is a life-saving treatment for people with liver failure.
                
Most liver transplants are successful. About 85 percent of transplanted livers are functioning after 1 year.2 Liver transplant surgery provides a cure for Wilson disease in most cases. More information is provided in the NIDDK health topic, Liver Transplantation.
A person cannot prevent Wilson disease; however, people with a family history of Wilson disease, especially those with an affected sibling or parent, should talk with a health care provider about testing. A health care provider may be able to diagnose Wilson disease before symptoms appear. Early diagnosis and treatment of Wilson disease can reduce or even prevent organ damage.
                
People with a family history of the disease may also benefit from genetic testing that can identify one or more gene mutations. A health care provider may refer a person with a family history of Wilson disease to a geneticista doctor who specializes in genetic diseases.