Wolman disease is a type of lysosomal storage disorder. It is an inherited condition that causes a buildup of lipids (fats) in body organs and calcium deposits in the adrenal glands. Common symptoms in infants include enlarged liver and spleen, poor weight gain, low muscle tone, jaundice, vomiting, diarrhea, developmental delay, anemia, and poor absorption of nutrients from food. Wolman disease is caused by mutations in the LIPA gene. It is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. The condition is severe and life-threatening, however new therapies, such as bone marrow transplantation, have shown promise in improving the outlook of children with this disease. Enzyme replacement therapy is also being developed.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Wolman disease. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abdominal pain 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Hepatic failure 90% Hepatomegaly 90% Hyperkeratosis 90% Malabsorption 90% Nausea and vomiting 90% Anemia 50% Ascites 50% Atherosclerosis 50% Congenital hepatic fibrosis 50% Multiple lipomas 50% Splenomegaly 50% Weight loss 50% Abnormality of temperature regulation 7.5% Abnormality of the adrenal glands 7.5% Cirrhosis 7.5% Esophageal varix 7.5% Pruritus 7.5% Reduced consciousness/confusion 7.5% Adrenal calcification - Autosomal recessive inheritance - Bone-marrow foam cells - Death in infancy - Diarrhea - Failure to thrive - Hepatic fibrosis - Hepatosplenomegaly - Hypercholesterolemia - Protuberant abdomen - Pulmonary hypertension - Steatorrhea - Vacuolated lymphocytes - Vomiting - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
 You can find relevant journal articles on Wolman syndrome and its treatment through a service called PubMed, a searchable database of medical literature. Information on finding an article and its title, authors, and publishing details is listed here. Some articles are available as a complete document, while information on other studies is available as a summary abstract. To obtain the full article, contact a medical/university library (or your local library for interlibrary loan), or order it online using the following link. Using "Wolman syndrome[ti] treatment" as your search term should locate articles. To narrow your search, click on the Limits tab under the search box and specify your criteria for locating more relevant articles. Click here to view a search. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=PubMed   The National Library of Medicine (NLM) Web site has a page for locating libraries in your area that can provide direct access to these journals (print or online). The Web page also describes how you can get these articles through interlibrary loan and Loansome Doc (an NLM document-ordering service). You can access this page at the following link http://nnlm.gov/members/. You can also contact the NLM toll-free at 888-346-3656 to locate libraries in your area.
Wolman disease is estimated to occur in 1 in 350,000 newborns.
Mutations in the LIPA gene cause Wolman disease.  The LIPA gene provides instructions for producing an enzyme called lysosomal acid lipase. This enzyme is found in the lysosomes (compartments that digest and recycle materials in the cell), where it processes lipids such as cholesteryl esters and triglycerides so they can be used by the body.  Mutations in this gene lead to a shortage of lysosomal acid lipase and the accumulation of triglycerides, cholesteryl esters, and other kinds of fats within the cells and tissues of affected individuals. This accumulation as well as malnutrition caused by the body's inability to use lipids properly result in the signs and symptoms of Wolman disease.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.