Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis is a type of lipid storage disease. Symptoms of this condition include diarrhea in infants, cataracts in children, tendon xanthomas, and progressive neurologic dysfunction. It is caused by mutations in the CYP27A1 gene. Treatment may involve chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA), inhibitors of HMG-CoA reductase, and surgery to remove cataracts.
 Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis is caused by mutations in the CYP27A1 gene. This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
 Yes, testing of the CYP27A1 gene is available. The Genetic Testing Registry provides information on clinical and research tests available for this condition. How is cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis diagnosed? Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis is diagnosed by a combination of clinical features, cholestanol levels, and genetic testing. Individuals with cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis have high levels of cholestanol in their blood. Genetic testing of the CYP27A1 gene is also available and can detect mutations in about 98% of patients.
 Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis may be treated with chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA), which has been shown to normalize levels of cholestonal and improve neurologic symptoms. Inhibitors of HMG-CoA reductase may be used alone or in combination with CDCA. They are also effective in decreasing cholestanol concentration and improving clinical symptoms, however these treatments can induce muscle damage. Coenzyme Q10 may improve muscle weakness, and cataract surgery may also be required.
Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis is a fat (lipid) storage disorder that affects many areas of the body. People with this disorder cannot break down certain lipids effectively, specifically different forms of cholesterol, so these fats accumulate in various areas of the body. Xanthomatosis refers to the formation of fatty yellow nodules (xanthomas). Cerebrotendinous refers to the typical locations of the xanthomas (cerebro- meaning the brain and -tendinous meaning connective tissue called tendons that attach muscle to bone).  Other features of cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis include chronic diarrhea during infancy, clouding of the lens of the eye (cataracts) developing in late childhood, progressively brittle bones that are prone to fracture, and neurological problems in adulthood, such as dementia, seizures, hallucinations, depression, and difficulty with coordinating movements (ataxia) and speech (dysarthria). The neurological symptoms are thought to be caused by an accumulation of fats and an increasing number of xanthomas in the brain. Xanthomas can also accumulate in the fatty substance that insulates and protects nerves (myelin), disrupting nerve signaling in the brain. Disorders that involve the destruction of myelin are known as leukodystrophies. Degeneration (atrophy) of brain tissue caused by excess lipid deposits also contributes to the neurological problems.  Xanthomas in the tendons (most commonly in the Achilles tendon, which connects the heel of the foot to the calf muscles) begin to form in early adulthood. Tendon xanthomas may cause discomfort and interfere with tendon flexibility. People with cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis are also at an increased risk of developing cardiovascular disease. If untreated, the signs and symptoms related to the accumulation of lipids throughout the body worsen over time; however, the course of this condition varies greatly among those who are affected.
The incidence of cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis is estimated to be 3 to 5 per 100,000 people worldwide. This condition is more common in the Moroccan Jewish population with an incidence of 1 in 108 individuals.
Mutations in the CYP27A1 gene cause cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis. The CYP27A1 gene provides instructions for producing an enzyme called sterol 27-hydroxylase. This enzyme works in the pathway that breaks down cholesterol to form acids used in the digestion of fats (bile acids). Mutations in sterol 27-hydroxylase impair its ability to break down cholesterol to a specific bile acid called chenodeoxycholic acid. As a result, a molecule called cholestanol, which is similar to cholesterol, accumulates in xanthomas, blood, nerve cells, and the brain. Cholesterol levels are not increased in the blood, but they are elevated in various tissues throughout the body. The accumulation of cholesterol and cholestanol in the brain, tendons, and other tissues causes the signs and symptoms of cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Cerebrotendinous Xanthomatosis  - Genetic Testing Registry: Cholestanol storage disease   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care