The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Mental retardation, X-linked, nonspecific. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Seizures 5% Autism - Dental crowding - Hyperactivity - Hypertelorism - Intellectual disability - Intellectual disability, moderate - Joint hypermobility - Mandibular prognathia - Open mouth - Short nose - Synophrys - Tented upper lip vermilion - Uplifted earlobe - Upslanted palpebral fissure - X-linked recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Prieto X-linked mental retardation syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormality of the nose 90% Clinodactyly of the 5th finger 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Gait disturbance 90% Low-set, posteriorly rotated ears 90% Ventriculomegaly 90% Abnormal dermatoglyphics 50% Abnormality of the hip bone 50% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the earlobes 50% Cryptorchidism 50% High forehead 50% Hypertelorism 50% Increased number of teeth 50% Muscular hypotonia 50% Neurological speech impairment 50% Optic atrophy 50% Patellar dislocation 50% Sacral dimple 50% Seizures 50% Abnormality of the pupil 7.5% Abnormality of the ribs 7.5% Delayed skeletal maturation 7.5% Epicanthus 7.5% Hernia of the abdominal wall 7.5% Nystagmus 7.5% Ptosis 7.5% Reduced bone mineral density 7.5% Strabismus 7.5% 11 pairs of ribs - Abnormality of the skin - Abnormality of the teeth - Cerebral atrophy - Clinodactyly - Coxa valga - Inguinal hernia - Intellectual disability - Low-set ears - Osteoporosis - Patellar subluxation - Prominent nose - Radial deviation of finger - Retrognathia - Talipes equinovarus - X-linked recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Mental retardation X-linked, South African type. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the cerebellum 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Decreased body weight 90% Incoordination 90% Long face 90% Macrotia 90% Narrow face 90% Neurological speech impairment 90% Seizures 90% Strabismus 90% Thick eyebrow 90% Adducted thumb 50% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the corpus callosum 50% Autism 50% Cerebral cortical atrophy 50% Feeding difficulties in infancy 50% Gait disturbance 50% Microcephaly 50% Nystagmus 50% Ophthalmoparesis 50% Pectus excavatum 50% Ventriculomegaly 50% Deeply set eye 7.5% Joint hypermobility 7.5% Mandibular prognathia 7.5% Skeletal muscle atrophy 7.5% Abnormality of the foot - Absent speech - Bowel incontinence - Cerebellar atrophy - Drooling - Dysphagia - Flexion contracture - Happy demeanor - Hyperkinesis - Intellectual disability, progressive - Intellectual disability, severe - Long nose - Loss of ability to walk in first decade - Muscular hypotonia - Mutism - Narrow chest - Neuronal loss in central nervous system - Open mouth - Ophthalmoplegia - Photosensitive tonic-clonic seizures - Sleep disturbance - Slender finger - Truncal ataxia - Urinary incontinence - X-linked dominant inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Mental retardation X-linked syndromic 11. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal nasal morphology 90% Blepharophimosis 90% Coarse facial features 90% Cognitive impairment 90% Macroorchidism 90% Macrotia 90% Neurological speech impairment 90% Obesity 90% Palpebral edema 90% Prominent supraorbital ridges 90% Seizures 7.5% Bulbous nose - Intellectual disability, moderate - Periorbital fullness - Specific learning disability - Thick lower lip vermilion - X-linked recessive inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Miles-Carpenter x-linked mental retardation syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abnormal dermatoglyphics 90% Strabismus 90% Abnormality of the genital system 50% Cognitive impairment 50% Decreased body weight 50% Facial asymmetry 50% Joint hypermobility 50% Microcornea 50% Talipes 50% Abnormality of the skin - Congenital contracture - Distal amyotrophy - Exotropia - Intellectual disability - Microcephaly - X-linked inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Mental retardation X-linked syndromic 7. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Cognitive impairment 90% Obesity 90% Tapered finger 90% Abnormal hair quantity 50% Abnormality of dental morphology 50% Hypoplasia of penis 50% Muscle weakness 50% Neurological speech impairment 50% Short stature 50% Cryptorchidism 7.5% Visual impairment 7.5% Intellectual disability - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Schimke X-linked mental retardation syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Choreoathetosis - External ophthalmoplegia - Growth delay - Hearing impairment - Intellectual disability - Postnatal microcephaly - Spasticity - X-linked inheritance - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.