X-linked agammaglobulinema is a primary immunodeficiency characterized by very low levels of immunoglobulins (proteins made by the immune system to help fight infections). People affected by this condition generally begin developing frequent and recurrent bacterial infections from about 6 months of age. Commonly diagnosed infections include lung infections (pneumonia and bronchitis), middle ear infections, conjunctivitis, sinus infections, various skin infections, and infections that are associated with chronic diarrhea. X-linked agammaglobulinemia is caused by changes (mutations) in the BTK gene and is inherited in an X-linked recessive manner. Treatment aims to boost the immune system, which may be accomplished by administering immunoglobulins through a vein (IVIG) or subcutaneously (SCIG). Frequent infections are generally treated with antibiotics.
 Managing X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA) mainly consists of preventing infections and treating infections aggressively when they do occur. Sudden infections in individuals with XLA are usually treated with antibiotics that are taken for at least twice as long as taken in healthy individuals. Preventing bacterial infections is very important for people with XLA. Gammaglobulin (a type of protein in the blood that contains antibodies to prevent or fight infections) is the main treatment for people with XLA. In the past, most people received this by intravenous (IV) infusion every two to four weeks. However, in the last few years, an increasing number of people have been receiving it by weekly subcutaneous injections. The choice of whether to receive it intravenously or by injection may just depend on what is most convenient for the doctor and/or patient. Sometimes, people with XLA have a reaction to gammaglobulin, which may include headaches, chills, backache, or nausea. These reactions are more likely to occur when they have a viral infection or when the brand of gammaglobulin has been changed. Some centers use chronic prophylactic antibiotics (continuous use of antibiotics) to prevent bacterial infections. Aggressive use of antibiotics lower the chance of chronic sinusitis and lung disease, which are common complications in individuals with XLA. Early diagnosis and treatment of bowel infections may decrease the risk of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Furthermore, children with XLA should not be given live viral vaccines. For example, they should be given inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) rather than the oral polio vaccine. The siblings of children with XLA should also be given inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) rather than oral polio vaccine in order to avoid infecting their affected sibling with live virus.
XLA occurs in approximately 1 in 200,000 newborns.
Mutations in the BTK gene cause XLA. This gene provides instructions for making the BTK protein, which is important for the development of B cells and normal functioning of the immune system. Most mutations in the BTK gene prevent the production of any BTK protein. The absence of functional BTK protein blocks B cell development and leads to a lack of antibodies. Without antibodies, the immune system cannot properly respond to foreign invaders and prevent infection.
This condition is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. The gene associated with this condition is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.  About half of affected individuals do not have a family history of XLA. In most of these cases, the affected person's mother is a carrier of one altered BTK gene. Carriers do not have the immune system abnormalities associated with XLA, but they can pass the altered gene to their children. In other cases, the mother is not a carrier and the affected individual has a new mutation in the BTK gene.