The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Maturity-onset diabetes of the young, type 7. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Maturity-onset diabetes of the young - Type II diabetes mellitus - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Maturity-onset diabetes of the young, type 5. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Multicystic kidney dysplasia 90% Nephropathy 90% Diabetes mellitus 50% Biliary tract abnormality 33% Elevated hepatic transaminases 33% Elevated serum creatinine 33% Glucose intolerance 33% Glycosuria 33% Gout 33% Proteinuria 33% Stage 5 chronic kidney disease 33% Abnormal localization of kidney 7.5% Abnormality of female internal genitalia 7.5% Abnormality of male internal genitalia 7.5% Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the pancreas 7.5% Arthritis 7.5% Cognitive impairment 7.5% Displacement of the external urethral meatus 7.5% Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency 7.5% Hearing impairment 7.5% Hepatic steatosis 7.5% Hyperuricemia 7.5% Hypothyroidism 7.5% Joint hypermobility 7.5% Mandibular prognathia 7.5% Pyloric stenosis 7.5% Renal hypoplasia/aplasia 7.5% Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency 6/7 Pancreatic hypoplasia 5/6 Renal cyst 19/23 Maturity-onset diabetes of the young 10/13 Abnormality of alkaline phosphatase activity 4/7 Multiple glomerular cysts 4/23 Bicornuate uterus 1/23 Hypoplasia of the uterus 1/23 Renal hypoplasia 1/23 Unilateral renal agenesis 1/23 Autosomal dominant inheritance - Cerebral cortical atrophy - Decreased numbers of nephrons - Epididymal cyst - Hypospadias - Nephrolithiasis - Onset - Phenotypic variability - Ureteropelvic junction obstruction - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
Young syndrome is a condition whose signs and symptoms may be similar to those seen in cystic fibrosis, including bronchiectasis, sinusitis, and obstructive azoospermia (a condition in which sperm are produced but do not mix with the rest of the ejaculatory fluid due to a physical obstruction, resulting in nonexistent levels of sperm in semen) . The condition is usually diagnosed in middle-aged men who undergo evaluation for infertility. Although the exact cause has not been identified, it is believed to be a genetic condition. At this time, there is no known effective treatment or cure for Young syndrome.
 The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Young syndrome. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Decreased fertility 90% Recurrent respiratory infections 90% Abnormality of the pancreas 50% Autosomal recessive inheritance - Azoospermia - Bronchiectasis - Congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung - Recurrent bronchitis - Recurrent sinopulmonary infections - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Maturity-onset diabetes of the young, type 6. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Maturity-onset diabetes of the young - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Maturity-onset diabetes of the young, type 8. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Abdominal pain - Abnormality of exocrine pancreas physiology - Autosomal dominant inheritance - Maturity-onset diabetes of the young - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Maturity-onset diabetes of the young, type 1. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Maturity-onset diabetes of the young - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
The Human Phenotype Ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for Maturity-onset diabetes of the young, type 3. If the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. You can use the MedlinePlus Medical Dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. Signs and Symptoms Approximate number of patients (when available) Autosomal dominant inheritance - Hyperglycemia - Infantile onset - Maturity-onset diabetes of the young - Type II diabetes mellitus - The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. Much of this information comes from Orphanet, a European rare disease database. The frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. The frequency may also be listed as a fraction. The first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. For example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. Because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. Sometimes, no information on frequency is available. In these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.
NDM is a monogenic form of diabetes that occurs in the first 6 months of life. It is a rare condition occurring in only one in 100,000 to 500,000 live births. Infants with NDM do not produce enough insulin, leading to an increase in blood glucose. NDM can be mistaken for the much more common type 1 diabetes, but type 1 diabetes usually occurs later than the first 6 months of life. In about half of those with NDM, the condition is lifelong and is called permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus (PNDM). In the rest of those with NDM, the condition is transient and disappears during infancy but can reappear later in life; this type of NDM is called transient neonatal diabetes mellitus (TNDM). Specific genes that can cause NDM have been identified. More information about each type of NDM is provided in the appendix.
                
Symptoms of NDM include thirst, frequent urination, and dehydration. NDM can be diagnosed by finding elevated levels of glucose in blood or urine. In severe cases, the deficiency of insulin may cause the body to produce an excess of acid, resulting in a potentially life-threatening condition called ketoacidosis. Most fetuses with NDM do not grow well in the womb and newborns are much smaller than those of the same gestational age, a condition called intrauterine growth restriction. After birth, some infants fail to gain weight and grow as rapidly as other infants of the same age and sex. Appropriate therapy improves and may normalize growth and development.
- Mutations in single genes can cause rare forms of diabetes.  - Genetic testing can identify many forms of monogenic diabetes.  - A physician evaluates whether genetic testing is appropriate.  - A correct diagnosis aided by genetic testing can lead to optimal treatment.  - Recent research results show that people with certain forms of monogenic diabetes can be treated with oral diabetes medications instead of insulin injections.