Zellweger spectrum refers to a group of related conditions that have overlapping signs and symptoms and affect many parts of the body. The spectrum includes Zellweger syndrome (ZS), the most severe form; neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy (NALD), an intermediate form; and infantile Refsum disease (IRD), the least severe form. Signs and symptoms of ZS typically become apparent in the newborn period and may include hypotonia, feeding problems, hearing and vision loss, seizures, distinctive facial characteristics, and skeletal abnormalities. Individuals with ZS often do not survive past the first year of life. The features of NALD and IRD often vary in nature and severity, and may not become apparent until late infancy or early childhood. Individuals with NALD or IRD may have hypotonia, vision and/or hearing problems, liver dysfunction, developmental delay and learning disabilities. Most individuals with NALD survive into childhood, and those with IRD may reach adulthood. Conditions in the Zellweger spectrum are caused by mutations in any of at least 12 genes and are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Treatment typically focuses on the specific signs and symptoms present in each individual.
Zellweger syndrome is one of a group of four related diseases called peroxisome biogenesis disorders (PBD). The diseases are caused by defects in any one of 13 genes, termed PEX genes, required for the normal formation and function of peroxisomes. The PBDs are divided into two groups: Zellweger spectrum disorders and Rhizomelic Chondrodysplasia Punctua spectrum. The Zellweger spectrum is comprised of three disorders that have considerable overlap of features. These include Zellweger syndrome (ZS, the most severe form), neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy (NALD), and Infantile Refsum disease (IRD, the least severe form).
                
Peroxisomes are cell structures that break down toxic substances and synthesize lipids (fatty acids. oils, and waxes) that are necessary for cell function. Peroxisomes are required for normal brain development and function and the formation of myelin, the whitish substance that coats nerve fibers. They are also required for normal eye, liver, kidney, and bone functions. Zellweger spectrum disorders result from dysfunctional lipid metabolism, including the over-accumulation of very long-chain fatty acids and phytanic acid, and defects of bile acids and plasmalogens--specialized lipids found in cell membranes and myelin sheaths of nerve fibers. Symptoms of these disorders include an enlarged liver; characteristic facial features such as a high forehead, underdeveloped eyebrow ridges, and wide-set eyes; and neurological abnormalities such as cognitive impairment and seizures. Infants will Zellweger syndrome also lack muscle tone, sometimes to the point of being unable to move, and may not be able to suck or swallow. Some babies will be born with glaucoma, retinal degeneration, and impaired hearing. Jaundice and gastrointestinal bleeding also may occur.
There is no cure for Zellweger syndrome, nor is there a standard course of treatment. Since the metabolic and neurological abnormalities that cause the symptoms of Zellweger syndrome are caused during fetal development, treatments to correct these abnormalities after birth are limited. Most treatments are symptomatic and supportive.
The prognosis for infants with Zellweger syndrome is poor. Most infants do not survive past the first 6 months, and usually succumb to respiratory distress, gastrointestinal bleeding, or liver failure.
The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), and other institutes of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), conduct research exploring the molecular and genetic basis of Zellweger syndrome and the other PBDs, and also support additional research through grants to major research institutions across the country. Much of this research focuses on finding better ways to prevent, treat, and ultimately cure disorders such as Zellweger syndrome.
Zellweger spectrum disorder is estimated to occur in 1 in 50,000 individuals.
Mutations in at least 12 genes have been found to cause Zellweger spectrum disorder. These genes provide instructions for making a group of proteins known as peroxins, which are essential for the formation and normal functioning of cell structures called peroxisomes. Peroxisomes are sac-like compartments that contain enzymes needed to break down many different substances, including fatty acids and certain toxic compounds. They are also important for the production of fats (lipids) used in digestion and in the nervous system. Peroxins assist in the formation (biogenesis) of peroxisomes by producing the membrane that separates the peroxisome from the rest of the cell and by importing enzymes into the peroxisome.  Mutations in the genes that cause Zellweger spectrum disorder prevent peroxisomes from forming normally. Diseases that disrupt the formation of peroxisomes, including Zellweger spectrum disorder, are called peroxisome biogenesis disorders. If the production of peroxisomes is altered, these structures cannot perform their usual functions. The signs and symptoms of Zellweger syndrome are due to the absence of functional peroxisomes within cells. NALD and infantile Refsum disease are caused by mutations that allow some peroxisomes to form.  Mutations in the PEX1 gene are the most common cause of Zellweger spectrum disorder and are found in nearly 70 percent of affected individuals. The other genes associated with Zellweger spectrum disorder each account for a smaller percentage of cases of this condition.
This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
These resources address the diagnosis or management of Zellweger spectrum disorder:  - Gene Review: Gene Review: Peroxisome Biogenesis Disorders, Zellweger Syndrome Spectrum  - Genetic Testing Registry: Infantile Refsum's disease  - Genetic Testing Registry: Neonatal adrenoleucodystrophy  - Genetic Testing Registry: Peroxisome biogenesis disorders, Zellweger syndrome spectrum  - Genetic Testing Registry: Zellweger syndrome  - MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: Seizures   These resources from MedlinePlus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions:  - Diagnostic Tests  - Drug Therapy  - Surgery and Rehabilitation  - Genetic Counseling   - Palliative Care