Herpes zoster oticus is a common complication of shingles, an infection caused by the varicella-zoster virus (which is the virus that also causes chickenpox). Shingles occurs in people who have had chickenpox and the varicella-zoster virus becomes active again. Herpes zoster oticus is caused by the spread of the virus to facial nerves and can cause intense ear pain; a rash around the ear, mouth, face, neck, and scalp; and paralysis of the face. Other symptoms may include hearing loss, vertigo (feeling that the room is spinning), tinnitus (hearing abnormal sounds), loss of taste in the tongue, and dry mouth and eyes. Some cases of herpes zoster oticus do not require treatment, but when treatment is needed, pain medications, antiviral drugs or corticosteroids may be prescribed. Vertigo is sometimes treated with medication as well. The prognosis of herpes zoster oticus is typically good but in some cases, hearing loss or facial paralysis may be permanent.
 Treatment for herpes zoster oticus typically includes anti-inflammatory drugs called steroids, which may reduce the inflammation of the nerves and help to ease the pain. Antiviral medications are usually prescribed, although whether antiviral medications are beneficial for treating this condition has not been confirmed. Strong pain medications may be prescribed if the pain continues. An eye patch may be recommended to prevent injury to the cornea (corneal abrasion) and damage to the eye if it does not close completely. Vertigo (feeling that the room is spinning) and dizziness may be treated with other medications.
Herpes zoster oticus, also called Ramsay Hunt Syndrome or Ramsay Hunt Syndrome type II, is a common complication of shingles. Shingles is an infection caused by the varicella-zoster virus, which is the virus that causes chickenpox. Shingles occurs in people who have had chickenpox and represents a reactivation of the dormant varicella-zoster virus. Herpes zoster oticus, which is caused by the spread of the varicella-zoster virus to facial nerves, is characterized by intense ear pain, a rash around the ear, mouth, face, neck, and scalp, and paralysis of facial nerves. Other symptoms may include hearing loss, vertigo (abnormal sensation of movement), and tinnitus (abnormal sounds). Taste loss in the tongue and dry mouth and eyes may also occur.
Some cases of herpes zoster oticus do not require treatment. When treatment is needed, medications such as antiviral drugs or corticosteroids may be prescribed. Vertigo may be treated with the drug diazepam
Generally, the prognosis of herpes zoster oticus is good. However, in some cases, hearing loss may be permanent. Vertigo may last for days or weeks. Facial paralysis may be temporary or permanent.
The NINDS supports research on shingles and shingles-related conditions. Current studies focus on the relationship between the persistence of neurotropic viruses and development of neurological diseases including herpes simplex and varicella-zoster viruses.